SHI JI 5: THE BASIC ANNALS OF   QIN

Boyi, the ancestor of Qin, assisted Emperor Yu.  Duke Mu, mindful   of righteousness, mourned for those who fought at Yao; but when they used men to accompany him in death,  the poem  on  the “Yellow Birds” was sung. King Xiaoxiang opened the way for an emperor. Thus I made “The Basic Annals of Qin”.4

The forbears of the Qin were descendants of Emperor Zhuan Xu.5 Zhuan Xu’s granddaughter was named Nüxiu.  When  Nüxiu  was  weaving,  a swallow happened to drop an egg. Nüxiu swallowed the egg and gave birth  to a son, Daye. Daye took as his wife a daughter of  Shao  Dian  named  Nühua,  and Nühua  gave  birth to Dafei.6
Dafei joined the sage ruler Yu in pacifying the waters and the land, and when the work had been completed, Emperor Shun presented Yu with a black jade baton. When Yu accepted it, he said, “I could not have done this if Dafei had not acted as my helper.”
Emperor Shun said, “Ah, Fei! You assisted  Yu  in  his  task.  You  shall  be given a black banner. Your descendants will hereafter prosper greatly.” He also gave him as a wife a beautiful daughter of the Yao  clan.
Dafei, bowing and accepting these gifts, aided Shun in subduing and  training the birds and beasts, and many of the birds and beasts became submissive. This was the man known as Boyi. Shun bestowed on him the surname Ying.7
Dafei had two sons. One was called Dalian and was the founder of the Bird-custom family. The other  was called Ruomu  and was the  founder  of the Fei family. His great-great-grandson  was  Fei  Chang. Some of  Fei Chang’s descendants lived in China and some lived among  the  Yi  and  Di tribes.
In the time  of  Jie,  the  last  ruler  of  the  Xia  dynasty,  Fei  Chang  deserted the Xia dynasty and went over to the side of the Shang.  King Tang, founder    of the Shang, made him his carriage driver  when  he defeated  Jie  at Mingtiao.
Dalian’s great-great-grandsons were  Mengxi  and  Zhongyan. Zhongyan had the body of a bird but spoke like a human being. Emperor  Taiwu, hearing of him, divined to see if he should  employ  him  as  his  carriage driver. The response being favourable, he employed him as such, and also gave   him   a  wife.   From  the   time  of  Emperor   Taiwu  on,   the   heirs of  
Zhongyan won merit generation after generation by assisting the state of Shang. Hence many members of the Ying family gained prominence and in time  became feudal lords.
Zhongyan’s great-great-grandson was Zhongjue. He lived among the Western Rong people and guarded the western border. Zhongjue sired Feilian, and Feilian sired Elai. Elai was very strong and Feilian was skilled    at running; both father and son offered their strength and ability in the service of Zhou, the  last ruler  of the Shang or Yin dynasty.  When King Wu   of the Zhou dynasty attacked and killed Zhou of the Yin,  Elai was killed at  the same time.
Feilian at this time had been sent by Zhou on a mission to the northern region. When he returned, he had no one to report to, so he built an altar     on Mt. Huotai and there made his report. He found a stone coffin with an inscription that read: “The emperor orders you, Chufu, not to take part in Yin’s disorders, but presents you with a stone coffin to bring glory to your family.”8  When Feilian died, he was accordingly buried on Mt. Huotai.
Feilian had another son named Jisheng, and Jisheng had a son named Mengzeng. Mengzeng enjoyed favour with King Cheng of the Zhou dynasty and is known as Zhai Black Wolf. Zhai Black Wolf sired Hengfu and Hengfu sired Zaofu.  Zaofu won favour  with King Mu of the  Zhou dynasty because  of his skill as a carriage driver.  King Mu acquired a team of four, made  up    of a  chestnut,  a  light  grey,  a  dappled red, and a  green ear,  and embarked on a hunting tour to the west, enjoying himself so much he forgot to return. When the rebellion of King Yan of Xu broke out, Zaofu was acting as  carriage driver for King Mu and he raced over the long road back  to  the Zhou capital, covering 1,000 li in one day, in order to put down  the rebellion.9
King Mu enfeoffed Zaofu in the city of Zhao, and  Zaofu’s  kin  from this  time on were known by the surname Zhao. It was five generations from Feilian and his son Jisheng down to Zaofu. Zaofu lived away from the  court  in Zhao;  Zhao Cui was his  descendant.  10
Feilian’s son Elai or Ge died  at an  early age.  He  had  a son  named Nüfang,  who sired Panggao.  Panggao  sired   Taiji,   Taiji   sired   Daluo,   and Daluo  sired Feizi.  Because of the favour  enjoyed  by Zaofu,  all   these persons  were  permitted  to  be  counted  as  members  of  the  Zhao  family  of the  city  of Zhao.
Feizi lived at Quanqiu or Dog Hill. He loved horses and domestic animals and was skilled at raising and breeding them. The people of Dog Hill mentioned him to King Xiao of the Zhou dynasty, and King Xiao summoned him and ordered him to pasture the royal horses in the area between the Qian and Wei rivers. The horses increased greatly in number.  
King Xiao wanted to see Feizi designated as the heir  of  Daluo.  But  Marquis Shen had given his daughter to Daluo as a wife and she had borne him a son named Cheng who had been designated as  heir.  Marquis  Shen  said to King Xiao, “Long ago an ancestor of mine, a woman  of  Mt.  Li,  married a man of the Rong people named Xuxuan and bore a son named Zhongjue. Because of his parentage Zhongjue paid allegiance to the Zhou dynasty and guarded the western border for it. As  a  result,  there  was  peace and harmony on the western border. Now I have given my daughter  to Daluo as a wife and she has borne him a son, Cheng, who has been designated heir.  The Shen and Daluo families are thus doubly related, and   all the Western Rong people have submitted to you. That is  why  you are  able to reign as king. Your Majesty would do well to consider this.”
King Xiao replied, “Long ago Boyi supervised the raising of animals for Emperor Shun, and the animals multiplied greatly.  Therefore  he was assigned a domain and presented with the surname Ying. Now  his descendant in later  ages  is  raising horses  for  me.  I  therefore  propose  to set aside land  for  him  so  he  may  become  a  dependant  domain,  assigning him the town of Qin and instructing him to carry on sacrifices to the Ying family.” He gave Feizi the title Qin Ying and refrained  from  removing  Daluo’s son by the daughter of Marquis Shen from the position of heir in order to remain at peace with the Western   Rong.
Qin Ying sired Qin Hou, who died after ten years of rule. Qin Hou sired Gongbo, who died after three years of rule. Gongbo sired Qin  Zhong. Three years after Qin Zhong assumed power, King Li of the Zhou dynasty acted in an unprincipled manner and many of the feudal lords turned against him.11 The Western Rong also revolted against the royal house and wiped out the descendants of Daluo in Dog Hill.
When King Xuan came to the throne of Zhou, he made Qin  Zhong  a grandee and sent him to punish the Western Rong, but they killed him. Qin Zhong thus died among the Rong after holding his position for twenty-three years.
Qin Zhong had five sons, the eldest of whom became Duke Zhuang. King Xuan summoned Duke Zhuang and his four brothers, gave them a force of 7,000 men, and sent  them  to  attack  the  Western  Rong,  whom  they defeated. The king then once more presented to Duke Zhuang the domain that had belonged to Qin Zhong, as well as the area of Dog Hill that had belonged to his ancestor Daluo, decreeing that he hold possession of both regions and act as grandee of the western border. Duke Zhuang resided in  the west, in the old region of Dog Hill.
Duke Zhuang had three sons, of whom the eldest was named Shifu. Shifu said,  “The  Rong killed our  grandfather  Qin Zhong.  Until  I  have  killed the  
ruler of the Rong, I will not  venture  to enter  my  domain.”  He accordingly led his forces in a surprise attack on the Rong, turning over his domain to   his younger brother, Duke Xiang. Duke Xiang thus became  the  heir  apparent.
After Duke Zhuang had ruled for forty-four years he died and the heir apparent, Duke Xiang, succeeded him as ruler.
In the first year of his rule, Duke  Xiang gave  his  younger  sister,  Muying,  to be the wife of King Feng.12
In the second year of Duke Xiang’s reign the Rong besieged Shifu at Dog Hill. Shifu attacked them but was taken prisoner.  A year or so later Shifu  was returned to his domain.
In the spring of Duke Xiang’s seventh year, King You of the Zhou dynasty, heeding the wishes of his favourite, Baosi, removed the heir  apparent  and set up Baosi’s son in his place, and several times deceived the feudal lords. The feudal lords revolted against him, and the Western Rong and Dog Rong peoples, joining forces with Marquis Shen, attacked the Zhou capital  and killed King You at the foot of Mt. Li. Duke Xiang of Qin led his forces to the rescue of the Zhou, fighting bravely in battle and winning merit. In order to avoid harassment from the Dog Rong, the Zhou dynasty moved its capital  east to the city of Luoyang.13
Duke Xiang led his  troops  to  escort  King  Ping  to  the  new  capital.  King Ping enfeoffed Duke Xiang as one  of the  feudal  lords,  bestowing on him the land from Mt. Qi on west. “The Rong  have behaved  in  an  unprincipled  manner,  invading  and  seizing  our  lands  of  Qi  and  Feng,”  he  said.  “But  Qin has succeeded in attacking and driving out the Rong, and therefore he shall possess these lands.” Thus the king  swore an oath with  Duke  Xiang, bestowing a  fief  and title  on  him.
Duke Xiang thus for the first time became the possessor of a feudal state and observed the rites appropriate to the exchange of  embassies  and  official visits and banquets. He used a set of three sacrificial animals, a red colt with a black mane, a yellow ox, and a ram, to sacrifice to the Lord on High at the Altar  of the  West.  In the  twelfth year  of his  rule, he  attacked the Rong and advanced as far as Mt. Qi, where he died. He was succeeded    by his son, Duke Wen.
In the first year of his rule, Duke Werrresided in  the  Western  Border Palace.  In his third year he took a force of 700 armed men and went east    to hunt. In his fourth year he arrived at the confluence of the Qian and Wei rivers. “In ancient times,” he said, “the Zhou dynasty gave my ancestor Qin Ying this land to dwell in, and his descendants have at last succeeded in becoming feudal lords.” He carried out divination by the  tortoise shell  to  see  if  he  should  settle  there.  The  answer  being favourable, he proceeded  
to build a town in which he took up residence.
In his tenth year he established the Altar of Fu, using a set of three sacrificial animals in the rites there.14 In his thirteenth year the  historians  for the first time began to keep a record of events, and many of the inhabitants changed their ways.15 In his sixteenth year Duke Wen led his forces in an attack on the Rong, who fled in defeat. Duke Wen thereupon gained possession of the land as far as Mt. Qi, where the remnants of the Zhou people lived. He presented the area east of Mt. Qi to the Zhou dynasty.16 In his nineteenth year he gained possession of the Treasures of Chen.17
In his twentieth year the law stipulating that a criminal’s three sets of relatives should be put to death along with the criminal himself was first promulgated.18 In his twenty-seventh year he attacked Daxin, Feng, and Date in the Southern Mountains. In his forty-eighth year Duke Wen’s heir apparent died and was given the posthumous title of Duke Jing. Duke Jing’s eldest son, the grandson of Duke Wen, was designated heir apparent.
In his fiftieth year of rule Duke Wen died and was buried on the Western Mountain. Duke Jing’s son was set up as ruler and is known as Duke Ning.
In his  second year  of rule  Duke  Ning moved his  residence  to  Pingyang. He dispatched troops to attack Dangshe. In his third year he fought  with  Hao, the ruler of Dangshe, and Hao fled to the Rong people. Thus the settlement at Dangshe was wiped out. In his fourth year Hui, a ducal son of the state of Lu, assassinated his lord, Duke Yin.19 In his twelfth year Duke Ning attacked the Dang family and took them  prisoner.20 Duke  Ning became ruler in his tenth year and died in his twelfth year of rule, being buried on the Western Mountain.
Duke Ning had three sons,  of whom the  eldest,  who  became  Duke  Wu, had been designated heir apparent. The second son, who had  the  same mother as the first, became Duke De. The third, Chuzi,  was  the  son of  a woman from the ruling family of the state of Lu.
When Duke Ning died, the militia leaders Fuji, Weilei, and Sanfu deposed the heir apparent and set  up  Chuzi  as  ruler.  In  the  sixth  year  of  Chuzi’s rule, Sanfu and the others joined in arranging to have someone attack and  kill Chuzi. Thus Chuzi became ruler at the age of five and died in the sixth year of his rule. Sanfu and the  others then set up the  former  heir  apparent as ruler, who became Duke  Wu.
In the first year of his rule Duke Wu attacked Pengxi, advancing as far  as Mt. Hua. He took up residence in the Feng Palace in Pingyang. In his third  year he punished Sanfu and the others, wiping them out along with their three sets of relatives.  This was because  they had killed Chuzi.  Gao Qumi   of the  state of Zheng killed his  lord, Duke  Zhao  (695 BC).  In his  tenth  year  
Duke Wu attacked the Rong people of Gui and Ji and for the first time established a district (xian) in the area. In his eleventh year he set up the districts of Du and Zheng and wiped out the  settlement of   Xiaoguo.
In Duke  Wu’s  thirteenth year  Guan Zhifu,  Lian Cheng and other  men of  Qi killed their lord, Duke Xiang, and set up the ducal grandson Wuzhi as ruler.21  The state of Jin wiped out the  states of Huo, Wei, and Geng.  Yong Lin of Qi killed Wuzhi, Guan Zhifu, and the others and set up Duke  Huan of  Qi.  Jin and Qi thus became powerful states. In Duke Wu’s nineteenth year   the ruler of Quwo in Jin for the  first time  assumed the  title  of marquis  of  Jin. Duke Huan of Qi became an overlord (ba) at Juan. Duke Wu of Qin died in his twentieth year of rule and was buried at Pingyang in Yong.  For  the  first time there were persons to accompany him in death, in this case sixty- six persons.22
Duke Wu had only one son, named Bai. Bai was not  set up as ruler  but  was enfeoffed in Pingyang. Instead, Duke  Wu’s  younger  brother  became ruler and is known as Duke De.
In the first year of his rule Duke De took up  residence  in the  Dazheng Palace in the city of Yong. He used 300  sets  of  sacrificial  animals  to  sacrifice at the Altar of Fu. Divining by the tortoise shell to see if he should reside at Yong, he was told that his sons  and  grandsons  in  ages  to  come would water their horses at the Yellow River. The earls of Liang and Rui came to pay their respects at the Qin court.
In  the  second  year  of  Duke  De’s  rule  the  fu was  observed  for  the first
time, dogs being used to suppress evil influences.23
Duke De became ruler at the age of thirty-three and died after two years of rule. He had three sons; the eldest became Duke Xuan,  the  second  became Duke  Cheng, and the  youngest  became Duke  Mu.
After the death of Duke Wu, his eldest son became ruler and is known as Duke Xuan. In the first year of Duke Xuan’s rule the states of Wey24 and Yan attacked the Zhou court, drove out King Hui, and set up Prince Tui as ruler. In Duke Xuan’s third year the earl of Zheng and Shu of Guo killed Prince Tui and put King Hui back on the throne.
In the fourth year of his rule Duke Xuan set up  the  Mi Altar.  He fought  with the state of Jin at Heyang and was victorious. In his twelfth year Duke Xuan died. He had nine sons but none of them became ruler. Instead Duke Xuan’s younger brother was set up and is known as Duke Cheng.
In the first year of Duke Cheng’s rule the  earls of Liang and Rui came  to  the Qin Court. Duke Huan  of  Qi  attacked  the  Mountain  Rong  and encamped at Guzhu. Duke Cheng died in the fourth year of his rule. He had seven sons but none of these became ruler, the  rule  passing  to  Duke  Cheng’s  younger  brother, who  became Duke Mu.  
In the first year of Duke Mu (659 BC), whose personal name was Renhao, the duke led an attack on Maojin and defeated it. In his fourth year he took a bride from the state of Jin; she was an elder sister of Shensheng, the heir apparent of Jin. This year Duke Huan of Qi attacked the state of Chu, advancing as far as Shaoling.
In Duke Mu’s fifth year, Duke Xian of Jin wiped out the  states of Yu  and  Guo and took prisoner the ruler of Yu  and the  grandee  Baili Xi.  He did this by bribing the men of Yu with jade disks and horses. After taking Baili Xi prisoner, he sent him to Qin to act as  an  attendant  to  Duke  Mu’s  bride. Baili Xi escaped from Qin and fled to Wan, where he was  seized  by  villagers of the state of Chu. Duke Mu had heard that Baili Xi was a man of worth and was anxious to buy him back from his captors, but he was afraid that the people of Chu would not hand him over. He therefore sent a messenger to say to Chu, “Baili Xi, one of the  attendants  to  my  bride, is there with you. I am prepared to offer five black ram skins as ransom for him.” The people of Chu agreed to this and handed him over.  At this time Baili Xi was over seventy years old.
Duke Mu untied his bonds and began questioning him on affairs of state. But  Baili Xi declined to answer,  saying,  “I am an official from a state that  has perished — how could I be worth consulting?”
Duke Mu said, “The ruler of Yu failed to make use of you and so he perished. That is no fault of yours.” He persisted in his questioning, and they talked for three days. Duke Mu was overjoyed and wanted to hand over the governing of the state to him, entitling him Lord Five Ram Skins. But Baili Xi declined, saying, “I cannot compare to my friend Jian Shu. But no one in the world recognizes Jian Shu’s worth. Once, when I was travelling and found myself in difficulty in the state of Qi, I had to beg food from the people of Zhi, and Jian Shu took me in. I wanted to use the opportunity to enter the service of Wuzhi, who was the ruler of Qi at that time, but Jian Shu dissuaded me, and so I was able to escape the difficulties that attended Wuzhi’s downfall.
“Later I went to the Zhou capital. Prince Tui of Zhou liked cattle, and so I tried to gain his attention by my skill in raising cattle. But when Prince Tui tried to employ me, Jian Shu stopped me from accepting. So I left, and was thus able to avoid being wiped out along with Prince Tui’s other supporters.
“When I took service under the ruler of Yu, Jian Shu once more tried to  stop me. I knew that the ruler of Yu would never heed me, but to tell the  truth, I was hoping to profit from the salary and rank and so I stayed on. If     I had once more listened to Jian Shu’s advice, I would have escaped, but because I failed to do so, I was involved in the ruler’s downfall. Because  of  
this I have come to understand his   worth.”
Duke Mu thereupon dispatched  an  envoy  with  generous  gifts  to  invite Jian Shu to take office, making him a grandee of the  upper    rank.
In the autumn of this year Duke Mu led his troops in an attack on Jin, fighting with the  Jin forces at Hequ.  Lady Li fomented trouble in Jin, and as   a result the heir apparent Shensheng killed himself at New  City  and  Chonger  and Yiwu fled to Ben.25
In the ninth year of Duke Mu’s rule, Duke  Huan of  Qi  called the  other feudal lords together for a meeting at Sunflower Hill. Duke Xian of Jin died, whereupon Lady Li set up her son Xiqi as ruler of Jin. Li Ke, a Jin official,  killed Xiqi, and when Xun Xi set up another of the duke’s sons, Zhuozi, as ruler, Li Ke  killed him too, along with Xun Xi.  Yiwu then sent  an envoy to  Qin asking if Qin would help him to become ruler of Jin. Duke Mu agreed to this and ordered Baili Xi to lead a force of troops and escort Yiwu to Jin.
Yiwu said, “If I succeed in becoming ruler, I  would like  to  take  eight  of Jin’s cities lying west of the Yellow River and present them to Qin.” Once he had reached Jin and become ruler, however, he sent Pi Zheng to Qin with excuses, reneging on his promise and failing to hand over the cities west of the Yellow River. Moreover, he put Li Ke to death.
When Pi Zheng received word of this, he was frightened and began scheming with Duke Mu, saying,  “The  people  of  Jin  do  not  want  Yiwu  as their ruler. The one they really want is Chonger. This going against  the promise to Qin and putting Li Ke to death is all a plot by Lü Sheng and Xi Rui.26  I advise you to offer some inducement and send an urgent summons  to Lü and Xi. Once they are here, it will  be  easy  to  have  Chonger  made ruler  of Jin.”
Duke Mu agreed to this and sent someone to return with Pi Zheng to Jin and invite Lü Sheng and Xi Rui to come to Qin. These two men, suspecting that Pi Zheng was acting in collusion with Qin, advised Yiwu to  have  Pi  Zheng put to death. Pi Zheng’s son Pi Bao fled  to  Qin,  where  he  advised Duke Mu, saying, “The ruler of Jin is unprincipled and his  people  do  not support him. He is ripe for attack!”
But Duke Mu said, “If the people do not support him, then how is he able    to put  to death a chief minister  such as Pi Zheng?  The fact that he  can do  so shows that he and his people are in accord.” So he  refused to heed Pi Bao’s advice, though he secretly made use of him.
In Duke Mu’s twelfth year, Guan Zhong and Xi Peng of Qi died.27 The state of Jin, being afflicted with drought, came to Qin to request grain. Pi Bao advised Duke Mu not to give Jin any grain but instead to take advantage of the famine to launch an attack on it. Duke Mu asked Gongsun Zhi for his opinion. He replied, “Years of dearth and plenty simply go in a  
cycle. You cannot refuse the  request.” And when the  duke  questioned Baili Xi, he said, “Yiwu has acted wrongly toward you, but what wrong have his people done?” So in the end the  duke  heeded  the  advice  of  Gongsun  Zhi and Baili Xi and sent grain to Jin, transporting it in boats and carts that stretched in a continuous line all the way from the  Qin capital  at  Yong  to  the Jin capital at Jiang.
In Duke Mu’s fourteenth year there was a famine  in Qin  and  the  duke sent a request to Jin for grain.  The  ruler  of  Jin  consulted  his chief ministers. Guo Shi said. “Take advantage of the famine and attack Qin.  You  can win great merit!” The Jin ruler decided to follow this advice.
In Duke Mu’s fourteenth year the ruler of  Jin called out  his  troops  and  led them in an attack on Qin. Duke Mu dispatched his own  troops,  appointing Pi Bao to lead them, and he himself took part in the attack.  On  the day renxu of the ninth month, he joined in battle with Yiwu, Duke Hui of Jin, in the region of Han.
The Jin ruler, abandoning the main body of his troops, fought for the advantage with the Qin forces, but as he turned  his  carriage  around,  his horses became bogged down. Duke Mu  and  the  men  under  him  chased after in pursuit, but they were unable to capture the Jin ruler and instead found themselves surrounded by the Jin army. The Jin forces attacked Duke Mu and had wounded him when 300 men who had earlier eaten horse flesh at Mt. Qi raced to his rescue, braving the Jin forces. The Jin forces broke  their encirclement, so that Duke Mu was able to escape and return to his own forces, and in addition the Jin ruler was taken  prisoner.
Sometime earlier, Duke Mu lost one of  his prize  horses. It  was discovered that a group of 300 or more rustics in the region of Mt. Qi had captured the horse and eaten it. The Qin officials in time apprehended the men and were about to punish them, but Duke Mu said, “A  gentleman does not allow his domestic animals to injure people.  I  have  heard that  if  one eats good horseflesh but fails to drink wine, it will lead to illness.” He therefore had wine passed out to all the men and pardoned their offence. Later, when the 300 men heard that Qin was about to attack Jin, they all asked to join in the attack. They  were  thus among the  troops accompanying the duke, and when they saw him hard pressed, they all brandished their spears and fought to the death in order to repay the kindness he had shown them with regard to the horseflesh. Thus Duke Mu was able to take the ruler of Jin prisoner and return with him to Qin.
He circulated an order throughout the  state,  saying, “Fast  until tomorrow. I am going to offer the Jin ruler  as  a  sacrifice  to  the  Lord on High.” When the Zhou Son of Heaven heard of this, he exclaimed,  “Jin  belongs to the same clan as myself!” and begged Duke Mu to spare the    Jin  
ruler.28
Duke Mu’s wife was an older sister of Yiwu, the Jin ruler, and when she heard of the proposed sacrifice, she donned mourning garments and appeared barefoot before the duke, saying, “I was unable to instruct my younger brother properly and so have occasioned you this inconvenience.”
Duke Mu said, “I supposed it was an illustrious feat to have captured the  Jin ruler. But now the Son of Heaven speaks on his behalf, and my wife is grieved.” He therefore swore an  oath  of  alliance  with  the  Jin  ruler  and gave him permission to return to his own state, shifting him to better quarters and feasting him with seven sets of sacrificial animals.
In the eleventh month the Jin ruler Yiwu returned to his state. He presented Qin with the territory west of the Yellow River and sent the heir apparent Yu to be a hostage in Qin.  Duke Mu gave the heir  apparent Yu one  of his daughters for a wife. At this time, therefore, the  Qin  territory  extended all the way east to the Yellow River.
In Duke Mu’s eighteenth year,  Duke  Huan  of  Qi  died.  In  his  twentieth year Qin wiped out the states of Liang and Rui.
In  Duke  Mu’s  twenty-second  year  the  heir  apparent  Yu,  hearing  that  the Jin ruler  was ill, said to himself,  “Liang was my  mother’s state, and now  Qin   has destroyed it. I have many brothers, and  if  my  father,  the  ruler  of  Jin, should pass away, Qin is certain to  detain me  here.  Then Jin will  ignore  my claim to the throne and set up one of my brothers  instead!”  He  therefore escaped from Qin  and  made  his  way  back  to Jin.
In Duke Mu’s twenty-third year Duke Hui of Jin died and his son Yu  was  set up as ruler. Duke Mu of Qin, angry at Yu for having escaped, thereupon invited the ducal son Chonger to come to Qin from the state of Chu, and offered him as a wife his daughter who had previously been married to Yu. Chonger at first declined the offer but later accepted her as his wife. Duke  Mu treated him with increasing respect and   generosity.
In Duke Mu’s twenty-fourth year he sent an envoy to inform the high ministers of Jin that he wished to place Chonger on the throne of Jin; the ministers of Jin gave their consent. Duke  Mu  accordingly  sent  men  to  escort Chonger  to Jin,  and in the  second month he  was set up as ruler  of  Jin. He is known as Duke Wen. Duke Wen then dispatched men to kill Yu.  Yu  is known posthumously as Duke Huai of  Jin.
In the autumn of this year Dai, the younger brother of King Xiang of the Zhou dynasty, led the Di people in an attack on the king. The king fled from the capital and took up residence in the state of Zheng. In the twenty-fifth year of Duke Mu the Zhou king sent envoys to Jin and Qin to inform them of his difficulties. Duke Mu of Qin led his troops and assisted Duke Wen of Jin   in restoring the Zhou king to his throne and killing his younger brother Dai.  
In Duke Mu’s twenty-eighth year Duke Wen of Jin defeated the state of  Chu at Chengpu.
In his thirtieth year Duke Mu aided Duke Wen of  Jin  in  besieging  the  state of Zheng. Zheng sent an envoy to say to Duke Mu, “Destroying Zheng and increasing the power of Jin will benefit Jin,  but  hardly  be  to the  profit of Qin. The stronger Jin becomes the greater the worry for Qin!” Duke Mu thereupon called off his troops and returned to Qin, and Jin likewise abandoned the siege.
In Duke Mu’s thirty-second year Duke Wen of Jin died (628  BC).  Some men of Zheng offered to  betray  Zheng  to  Jin,  saying,  “We  have  charge  of the  city gate  — Zheng can be taken by surprise   attack.”
Duke Mu consulted Jian Shu and Baili Xi, but they replied, “No one  who  has to pass through numerous states and journey 1,000 li to carry out a surprise attack is likely to have much success. Moreover,  if  these  men betray Zheng’s secrets to us, how do we know that people of our own state are not secretly informing Zheng of our plans? The idea is impossible!”
But Duke Mu replied, “You understand nothing  of  this.  I  have  already made my decision!” Then he called out his forces, appointing Baili Xi’s son Mengming Shi, Jian Shu’s  son Xiqi  Shu,  and Bai Yibing to  lead the  troops. The day the troops set out, Baili Xi and Jian Shu both wept over the departure. Duke Mu accosted them angrily, saying,  “Now  that  my  troops are setting out, what do you mean by weeping and trying to detain the army?”
The two old men replied, “It is not that we would dare to detain your army. But when the army goes, our sons go with it. We are old, and if the army is long in returning, we fear we will never see them again. That is the only reason we weep.”
When the old men had withdrawn from the duke’s presence, they said to their sons, “If the army you are with is defeated, it will surely be at the narrow defile of Yao.”
In the spring of Duke Mu’s thirty-third year Qin’s forces set out  for  the east. As they passed the northern gate of the Zhou capital on  their  way through Jin, the royal grandson Man said, “The Qin army has no sense of propriety. How could it help but suffer defeat?”29
The Qin troops had advanced as far as Hua when they encountered Xian Gao, a travelling merchant of Zheng who was taking twelve  oxen  to  the Zhou capital to sell. Seeing the Qin troops, he became fearful that he would  be put to death or  taken  captive,  and  so  he  presented  his  oxen,  saying, “The ruler of Zheng, hearing that  your  great state  was coming to punish  him, has respectfully taken measures for his defence, and at the same time has sent me with these twelve oxen for the provisioning of your officers.”  
The three Qin generals conferred together, saying, “We had intended to make a surprise attack on Zheng, but now Zheng already knows about it. Better to abandon the mission than to go any farther.” They proceeded to wipe out Hua, a city on the Jin border.
At this time the burial of Duke Wen of Jin had not  yet  been carried out.  His heir, Duke Xiang, was enraged. “Qin thinks nothing of the fact that I am newly bereaved and takes advantage of our mourning to wipe  out  our  city of Hua!” he said. Then he dyed his  white  mourning  garments  black  and called out his troops to cut off the Qin forces at Yao. He inflicted a crushing defeat on the Qin army, not allowing a single man to escape. He took the three Qin commanders prisoner and returned with them to  Jin.
The widow of Duke Wen of Jin was a  daughter  of the  Qin ruling house,  and she spoke to her son regarding the three captive Qin generals, saying, “The hatred Duke Mu bears these men eats into his very bones  and  marrow! I beg you to send them back to Qin so that my  lord of Qin may  have the pleasure of boiling them alive!”
The Jin ruler consented to this and sent the three generals back to Qin. When they arrived, Duke Mu donned white mourning garments and went   out to the suburbs to greet them.  Addressing  them,  he  wept  and  said,  “I failed to heed the advice of Baili Xi and Jian Shu and so brought shame on  you three. What fault have you committed? I ask only that you give all your thought to how we may wipe  out  this  disgrace,  never  slacking  your efforts!” He then restored the three men to their posts and ranks and  treated them with even greater  favour.
In Duke Mu’s thirty-fourth year  Shangchen,  the  heir  apparent  of  the state of Chu, murdered his father, King Cheng, and became  ruler  in  his place. Duke Mu once more ordered Mengming Shi and  the  other commanders to lead the Qin forces in an attack on Jin. They engaged in  battle at Pengya but, failing to win  the  advantage,  withdrew  their  troops and returned home.
The ruler of the Rong people sent You Yu to Qin. You Yu’s forbears were people of Jin who had fled from Jin and gone to live among the Rong. You Yu could therefore speak the language of Jin. The  Rong  ruler,  having  heard  that Duke Mu was a worthy man, dispatched You Yu to observe  the  situation in Qin.
Duke Mu showed You Yu the goods and possessions heaped up in his palace, but You Yu said, “If these were made by ghosts, it must have  exhausted the spirit world, and if they were made by human beings, it must have been bitter for the people!”
Duke Mu, puzzled, questioned him, saying, “China employs the Odes and Documents, its rites and music, its laws and regulations to govern the land,  
but even so there are times of chaos. Now  the  Rong and Yi people  have  none of these, so how can they bring about order? It must be very difficult,  is it not?”
You Yu laughed and replied, “It is precisely because of these that China is    in chaos! In ancient times when the  sage  rulers  such  as  the  Yellow Emperor created rites and music, laws and regulations, they took the lead   in observing and carrying them out, and a small measure of order was achieved. But the rulers of later ages grow daily more arrogant and licentious, scrutinizing and berating their subjects in the name of the law, while their subjects, utterly exhausted, angrily reproach their superiors in  the name of benevolence and righteousness. So superior  and  inferior wrangle and revile one another, usurping and murdering until whole clans are wiped out. And all because of such things as rites and music, laws and regulations!
“The Rong and Yi people are not like this. Superiors treat their inferiors with simplicity and thoughtfulness, while  inferiors  serve  their  superiors with loyalty and good faith, and the governing of the whole state is like the ordering of a single individual. No one knows why  order  comes  about  — such is the ordering of a true sage.”
When Duke Mu retired from the interview, he questioned his internal secretary Liao, saying, “I have heard that  a  sage  in  a  neighbouring  state can be a source of worry to that state’s rivals. Now this worthy man You Yu could be a threat to me.  What should I  do?”
The internal secretary Liao replied,  “This  Rong ruler  lives  hidden away  in the borderlands and has never heard the music of China. You could try sending him some women musicians to distract  his  attention.  Meanwhile you could make various requests of You Yu in order to cause dissension between him and his ruler, detaining him here and failing to send him back when the date for his return comes. The Rong ruler will wonder at this and will surely begin to suspect You Yu. Once dissension is sown between ruler and subject, we can make  You  Yu  our  captive.  And if the  Rong ruler  likes our music, he is bound to neglect affairs of government.”
Duke Mu approved this plan and accordingly seated You Yu  on  a  mat  close by his side, pressed one dish after another  on him,  and  questioned  him about the topography of the Rong territory and the strength of  its  armed forces, till he had learned all about them. Then he ordered the internal secretary to send two sets of eight women musicians each to the Rong ruler. The Rong ruler accepted the musicians,  found  them  to  his  liking, and by year-end had still not sent them back. Qin then sent You Yu back to his own country.
You   Yu    repeatedly   admonished   the   Rong   ruler,   but   his  advice   went  
unheeded. Meanwhile, Duke Mu several times sent persons to speak to You Yu in secret and invite him to come to Qin. In the end You Yu left the Rong ruler and came over to the side of Qin. Duke Mu treated him with the courtesy due a guest and questioned him on how to go about attacking the Rong.
In his thirty-sixth year Duke Mu once more bestowed favours  on Mengming and the other commanders and sent them to lead troops in an attack on Jin, burning their boats behind them when  they  crossed  the Yellow River. They inflicted a crushing defeat on the men of Jin, seizing the cities of Wangguan and Jiao and thus repaying Jin for the battle of Yao. The people of Jin all kept to their cities and did not venture    forth.
Then Duke Mu in person crossed the Yellow River  at  Reed  Ford  and raised a grave mound for the dead who had fallen in the battle of Yao, proclaiming mourning and carrying out lamentations for three days.
He then swore this oath with his army: “You, my officers and  men, hearken and cease your clamour! I declare this oath to you. The men of old consulted with their grey-haired ones, the  hoary-headed,  and  thus  they were without error. But I keep recalling how I failed to heed the counsels     of Jian Shu and Baili Xi.  Therefore I take this oath, so that ages hereafter  may remember my error.”30
When gentlemen heard of this, they all wept tears of admiration, saying, “Ah, Duke Mu of Qin did right by others. So in the end  he  achieved  a felicitous  outcome  through Mengming.”
In his thirty-seventh year Duke Mu employed You Yu’s advice to carry out an attack on the Rong ruler, acquiring twelve new states, extending his territory 1,000 li, and making himself overlord of the Western Rong. The Son of Heaven dispatched Guo, the Duke of Shao, to congratulate Duke Mu and present him with a golden drum.
In his thirty-ninth year (621 BC) Duke  Mu died and was buried at  Yong. He was accompanied in death by 177 persons. Three good ministers of the Ziyu family, Yanxi, Zhonghang and Zhenhu, were among those who followed him in death. The people  of  Qin,  grieved  at  this,  composed  for  them  the song in the Book of Odes known as “Yellow Birds”.31
The gentleman remarks: Duke Mu of Qin broadened his territory and increased his state, in the east humbling the powerful Jin,  in  the  west making himself overlord of the Rong barbarians. But he never became a leader of the alliance, which is only right.32  For when he died, he cast aside  his people and instead enlisted his good ministers to  accompany  him  in death. When the kings of antiquity passed away, they left  virtue  behind  them and laws to be handed down. How could they ever snatch away their best men and good ministers, causing their people to grieve? So we    know  
that Qin will never again be able to march east    in conquest.33
Duke Mu had forty sons. The heir apparent Ying succeeded him as ruler and is known as Duke  Kang.
Duke Kang first year: in the previous  year,  when  Duke  Mu died,  Duke Xiang of Jin also died. Duke Xiang’s younger brother  was named Yong  and, his mother being of the state of Qin, he was living in Qin. Zhao Dun, a high official of Jin, wanted to make him ruler of Jin and therefore dispatched Sui Hui34 to go to Qin to fetch him. The Qin armed forces had escorted Yong as far as Linghu when the people of Jin, having meanwhile set up Duke Xiang’s son as their new ruler, instead sent a force to attack the Qin army. The Qin army was defeated and Sui Hui fled back to   Qin.
In Duke Kang’s second year Qin attacked Jin and seized the city of Wu to retaliate  for  its defeat  at Linghu.
In Duke Kang’s fourth year Jin attacked Qin and seized Shaoliang. In his sixth year Qin attacked Jin and seized Jima, fighting at Hequ and inflicting a great defeat on the Jin army. The men of Jin, worried that Sui Hui, having gone over to Qin, would make trouble for Jin, sent Wei Shouyu to go to Qin and, pretending that he had turned against Jin, to plot with Sui Hui. By this ruse he was able to capture Sui Hui and take him back to Jin.
Duke Kang died twelve years after assuming the  throne  and  was succeeded by his son, Duke Gong.  In Duke Gong’s second year, Zhao Chuan  of Jin murdered his ruler, Duke Ling. In Duke  Gong’s  third  year,  King  Zhuang of Chu, being very powerful at this time, marched north with his troops as far as Luoyang and asked about the cauldrons of Zhou.35
Duke Gong died after five years of rule and was succeeded by his son, known as Duke Huan. In Duke Huan’s third year Jin defeated one of Qin’s generals. In Duke Huan’s tenth year King Zhuang of Chu conquered Zheng and advanced north to defeat the Jin forces at the Yellow River. At this time Chu, acting as overlord, called the other feudal rulers together to a conference to conclude an alliance.
In Duke Huan’s twenty-fourth year, Duke Li became ruler of Jin. He concluded an alliance with Duke Huan of Qin, the two states occupying opposite sides of the Yellow River, but once the Qin ruler had returned to     his capital, he violated the alliance and joined with the Di people in plotting and carrying out a surprise attack on Jin. In Duke Huan’s twenty-sixth year Jin led the other feudal lords in an attack on  Qin.  The  Qin  army  fled  in defeat, its enemies pursuing it as far as the Jing River before turning back. Duke Huan died in his twenty-seventh year of rule and was succeeded by   his  son,  Duke Jing.
In Duke Jing’s fourth year (573 BC) Luan Shu of Jin murdered his ruler, Duke  Li.  In Duke  Jing’s  fifteenth  year  Qin  went  to  the  rescue  of Zheng,  
defeating the Jin troops at Li. At this time Duke Dao of Jin was acting as the leader of the alliance.
In Duke Jing’s eighteenth year Duke Dao of  Jin,  being  very  powerful  at this time, several times called the  other  feudal  leaders  together  and  led them in an attack on Qin, defeating the Qin army. When the Qin army  fled,  the Jin forces pursued them, eventually crossing  the  Jing  River  and advancing as far  as Yulin before turning   back.
In his twenty-seventh year of rule Duke Jing went to Jin and concluded an alliance with Duke Ping, but having done  so, he  proceeded to violate   it.
In Duke Jing’s thirty-sixth year (541 BC) the ducal son Wei of Chu murdered his ruler and set himself on the throne.  He  is  known  as  King Ling. Duke Jing of Qin had a younger brother  by  the  same  mother  as  himself named Houzi or Qian. He enjoyed favour with Duke Jing and was  very rich, but when someone slandered him to the duke, he fled to the state of Jin, fearing punishment. He was accompanied by an entourage of 1,000 carriages. Duke Ping of Jin said, “If you are this  rich,  why  do  you  run away?” Houzi replied, “The ruler of Qin is unprincipled and I am afraid of being put to death. I would like to wait till there has been a change of ruler before going home.”
In Duke Jing’s thirty-ninth year King Ling of Chu, who was powerful at this time, summoned the other feudal leaders to a meeting at Shen, where he acted as leader of the alliance and put Qing Feng of Qi to death. Duke Jing of Qin died in his fortieth year of rule and was succeeded by his son, who became Duke Ai. At this time Houzi returned to Qin.
In Duke Ai’s eighth year (529 BC) the ducal son Qiji of Chu murdered his lord, King Ling, and set himself up as ruler. He is known as King Ping. In Duke Ai’s eleventh year King Ping of Chu asked the ruler of Qin for one of his daughters as a bride for his son, the heir apparent Jian. But when the woman arrived in Chu and he saw how beautiful she was, he took her for himself.
In Duke Ai’s fifteenth year King Ping of Chu was about to put to death his heir  apparent Jian, but Jian escaped, and the Chu minister  Wu Zixu fled to  the state of Wu. The ducal house  of the  state  of Jin had sunk  very low  at  this time, power being in the hands of the six great ministerial families who struggled for supremacy  within the  state.36  For  this  reason Qin and Jin for  a long time  refrained from attacking each  other.
In Duke Ai’s thirty-first year King Helü of Wu and Wu Zixu attacked Chu. King Zhao of Chu fled to the state of Sui and  the  Wu  forces  eventually entered the Chu capital of Ying.  The Chu grandee Shen Baoxu went to Qin    to report the emergency, refusing to eat for seven days and for seven days and nights wailing and lamenting. Finally Qin agreed to dispatch a force   of  
500 war chariots to rescue Chu. They defeated the Wu army, which  returned to Wu, and King Zhao was at last able to re-enter the capital city    of Ying (505 BC).
After thirty-six years as ruler, Duke Ai died.  The heir apparent, Duke Yi,  had died previously and never actually became ruler. Duke Yi’s son was set up as the new ruler and is known as Duke Hui (I). In the first year of Duke Hui’s rule Confucius carried out the  duties of the  prime  minister  of  Lu.37
In Duke Hui’s fifth year the Jin ministerial families Zhonghang and Fan revolted against Jin. Jin ordered the Zhi family and viscount Jian of Zhao to attack them, whereupon the Fan and Zhonghang families  fled to Qi.  Duke  Hui died in his tenth year    and was succeeded by his son, Duke Dao.
In Duke Dao’s second year the Qi minister Tian  Qi  murdered  his sovereign, Ruzi, and set up Ruzi’s elder  brother, Yangsheng,  as ruler  of Qi;  he is known as Duke Dao of Qi.
In the sixth year of Duke Dao  of  Qin  the  state  of  Wu  defeated  the  Qi army. The people of  Qi  murdered  Duke  Dao  and  set  up  his  son  as  Duke Jian. In Duke Dao’s ninth year Duke Ding  of  Jin  and  King  Fuchai  of  Wu swore an alliance at Huangchi. They quarrelled as to which should take precedence, but in the end Wu went first since its power exceeded that of   the central states of China.
In Duke Dao’s twelfth year Tian Chang of Qi murdered Duke Jian and set up Duke Jian’s younger brother as Duke Ping, with Tian Chang as prime minister. In Duke Dao’s thirteenth year Chu wiped out the state  of  Chen. Duke Dao of Qin died in the fourteenth year of his rule  and was succeeded  by his son, who became Duke Ligong. Confucius died in the twelfth year of Duke  Dao’s rule  (479 BC).
In the second year of Duke Ligong’s rule the people of Shu came  to Qin  with gifts.38 In Duke Ligong’s sixteenth year a canal was dug that  ran  parallel to the Yellow River and 20,000 troops were  dispatched to attack  the area of Dali and seize the city of Wangcheng. In Duke Ligong’s twenty- first year Pinyang was made into a district. Jin seized  the  region  of Wucheng.
In Duke Ligong’s twenty-fourth year  rebellion broke  out  in  Jin,  Zhi  Bo was killed, and his lands were divided up among the Zhao, Hann, and Wei families.  In Duke  Ligong’s  twenty-fifth year Zhi Bo’s son Zhi Kai fled with  the people of his city to  Qin. In  Duke  Ligong’s thirty-third  year  Qin attacked the Yiqu people and captured their ruler. In Duke Ligong’s thirty- fourth year there was an eclipse of the sun. Duke Ligong died and was succeeded by his  son,  Duke Zao.
In Duke Zao’s second year the region of Nanzheng revolted. In his thirteenth year  the  Yiqu people  came  to attack Qin,  advancing as far  as the  
area south of the Wei River. In the fourteenth year Duke Zao died and was succeeded by his younger brother, known as Duke Huai.
In Duke Huai’s fourth year the militia leader Chao joined with the chief ministers of Qin in besieging Duke Huai, whereupon the duke committed suicide. Duke Huai’s  heir  apparent  was named Zhaozi, but  as he  had died  at an early age, the chief ministers set up his son as ruler. He is known as Duke  Ling and was the  grandson of Duke  Huai.
In Duke Ling’s sixth year Jin walled the city of Shaoliang, whereupon Qin attacked the city. In Duke Ling’s thirteenth year Qin walled Jigu. Duke Ling died, but his son, Duke Xuan, did not succeed  him.  Instead  he was succeeded by his paternal uncle Daozi, who became Duke Jian. Duke  Jian  was a son of Duke Huai and younger brother of Zhaozi.
In Duke Jian’s sixth year officials were for the first time ordered to wear swords. The Luo canal  was  dug  and  the  city  of  Chongquan  walled.  Duke Jian died in his sixteenth year and was succeeded by his son, Duke Hui (II).
In Duke Hui’s twelfth year his son Chuzi was born. In Duke Hui’s  thirteenth year Qin attacked Shu and seized Nanzheng. Duke Hui died and was succeeded by his son Chuzi, but in  Chuzi’s  second  year  of  rule  the militia leader Gai escorted Duke Ling’s son, Duke Xian, from the region of Hexi and set him up as ruler. He killed Chuzi and his mother and sank their bodies in the depths of the river. From this time on,  Qin  underwent  frequent changes of rulership, ruler and subject clashing and  contending  with one another. As a result, Jin was able to regain power  and to  seize  Qin’s lands west of the Yellow   River.
In Duke Xian’s first year he prohibited the practice of “following in death”. In his second year the city of Yueyang was walled.
In the first  month  of  his  fourth  year, the day  gengyin,  the future Duke Xiao  was  born. In  Duke  Xian’s eleventh  year Dan,  the grand  historian  of  the Zhou court, had an interview with Duke  Xian  and  said,  “The  states  of Zhou  and  Qin  were  originally  joined  together,  but  later  they  separated.   Five hundred years after the separation they will join together again, and seventy-seven years after  they join together  a  dictator  king will appear.”39
In Duke Xian’s sixteenth year peach trees blossomed in winter, and in his eighteenth year it rained gold on Yueyang. In his  twenty-first  year  Qin fought with Jin at Shimen and cut off the heads of 60,000 of the enemy. The Zhou Son of Heaven congratulated Qin by presenting it with  an  embroidered sacrificial dress. In Duke Xian’s twenty-third year Qin fought with Wei and Jin at Shaoliang  and  captured  their  leader  Gongsun  Cuo. Duke Xian died in his twenty-fourth year of rule and was succeeded by his son, Duke Xiao, who was twenty-one years of age at the time.
Duke  Xiao  first  year  (361  BC):  In the  area  east  of the  Yellow  River and  
the mountains, six powerful states were in existence, the ruler  King Wei of  Qi, King Xuan of Chu, King Hui of Wei, Duke  Dao of Yan,  Duke  Ai of Hann,  and Duke Cheng of Zhao being ranged side  by  side,  while  in the  region of the Huai and Si rivers there were ten or more smaller states. Chu and Wei adjoined Qin’s borders. Wei had built a long wall extending from  Zheng  along the Luo River and then north, where Wei held the region of Shangjun, while Chu held possession of Ba and Qianzhong south of the Han River. The Zhou royal house had sunk into insignificance and the feudal lords ruled by force, wrangling with one another and annexing each  other’s  lands.  Qin  was situated far out on the border in the old province of Yong and did not participate in the alliances of the feudal lords of the central states, being treated instead like a barbarian people.
Duke Xiao thereupon began to exercise kindness in his rule, assisting the orphaned and widowed; he invited fighting men, clarified the awards they would receive for their accomplishments, and circulated  an  order throughout his realm, saying: “In past times our Duke Mu, residing in the region of Mt. Qi and Yong, cultivated virtue and practised the martial arts,    in the east pacifying the troubles in Jin  and  fixing  his  borders  along  the Yellow River, while in the west he became overlord  of  the  Rong  and  Di people and extended his territory  1,000  li.  The  Son  of  Heaven acknowledged his leadership and the feudal  lords  all  offered congratulations — so glorious was the manner in which he opened the way for  future accomplishment!
“But then came the time of dukes Ligong,  Zao,  and  Jian,  the  disquiet  of  the Chuzi affair, when the state  was beset  by internal woes and there  was no leisure to tend to outside affairs. Then the Three Jin40 attacked and wrested from us the lands west of the Yellow  River  that  had belonged to  our former ruler, and the feudal lords looked down on Qin. No shame could have  been greater  than ours!
“As soon as Duke Xian assumed rule, however, he brought order to the borderlands and moved his capital to Yueyang, hoping to  march  east  in attack and to recover the old territories held by Duke Mu, and to carry out the kind of government measures that Duke Mu had. When I recall these intentions cherished by the former ruler, my heart is constantly pained. If among the visitors to our state or the various officials there is anyone who can devise some effective plan for strengthening Qin, I will honour him with office and apportion lands to  him.”
Duke  Xiao  then  called  out  troops  and  sent  them  east  to  besiege  the  city of Shan, and  west  to  cut  down  the  leader  of  the Rong  people of  Huan.  When Wei Yang heard of the order which Duke  Xiao  had  circulated throughout  his  state,  he  journeyed  west  to  Qin  and  sought   an  interview  
with Duke Xiao through the  introduction of Jing  Jian.41
Duke Xiao second year: the Son of Heaven sent him a  gift  of sacrificial meat.
Duke Xiao third year: Wei Yang spoke to the duke, urging him to change   the laws, impose penalties,  encourage  agricultural  pursuits  within  the state, and on the foreign front to reward those who would fight and die in battle. Duke Xiao approved of these proposals. Gan Long, Du  Cui,  and  others disagreed, and an argument ensued, but in the end the duke put Wei Yang’s laws into effect. The people at first complained bitterly,  but  after three years had passed, they acknowledged the suitability of the laws, and Wei Yang was elevated to the rank of zuoshuzhang.42 An account will be found in the chapter on Lord Shang.
Duke Xiao seventh year: the duke met with King Hui of Wei at Duping. Eighth year: he fought with Wei  at  Yuanli  and  proved  successful.  Tenth year: Wei Yang was promoted to the rank of  daliangzao43  and  led  the troops to besiege the Wei city of Anyi, forcing it to surrender. Twelfth year: the city of  Xianyang  was  laid  out  and  the  Memorial  Gate  was constructed.44 The Qin ruler moved his capital to Xianyang. The smaller hamlets and villages were grouped together to form large districts, with a magistrate to head each district. There were  thirty-one  districts.  The  ridges that bounded the fields were opened up, and in the east the  Qin territory extended beyond the Luo River.
Duke Xiao fourteenth year: the fu tax was first established.    Nineteenth
year: the Son of Heaven recognized  the  duke  as  a  hegemon.  Twentieth year: the other feudal lords all extended their  congratulations.  Qin dispatched Gongzi Shaoguan to lead the  troops  and  convene  the  feudal lords for a meeting at Fengze and then pay respects at the court of the Son   of Heaven. Twenty-first year: Qi defeated Wei at  Maling.  Twenty-second year: Wei Yang attacked Wei and captured the Wei leader Gongzi Ang. Wei Yang was enfeoffed as a marquis and given the  title of    Lord Shang.
Duke Xiao twenty-fourth year: the Qin army fought with Jin (Wei) at Yanmen, capturing its leader Wei Cu. Duke Xiao died and was succeeded by his son, the ruler Huiwen. This year Wei Yang was put to death (338 BC).
Earlier, when Wei Yang first promulgated the new laws for Qin, the laws were not effective, with even the heir apparent violating the prohibitions.  Wei Yang said, “The reason the laws are not effective is that those in high position take the lead in violating them. If you want the laws to work, then begin by  punishing  the  heir  apparent!”  Since  the  heir  apparent  could  not be subjected to the punishment of tatooing,  his  tutor  was  tatooed  in  his place. After this the laws were heeded and the people of Qin were  well ordered.  But when Duke  Xiao died and the  heir  apparent was set up,   there  
were many members of the ruling family who  hated  Wei  Yang.  Wei  Yang fled from the state and was accordingly accounted a traitor. In the end he was torn apart by carriages to serve as a warning to the state of Qin.
First year of  the  ruler  Huiwen (337  BC):  the  men  of  Chu,  Hann,  Zhao, and Shu came to the court of Qin to pay  their  respects.  Second year:  the  Son of Heaven sent  congratulations.  Third year: the  ruler  donned the  cap of manhood.45 Fourth year: the Son of Heaven presented  the  ruler  with meat from the sacrifices to the Zhou ancestors Wen and Wu. The rulers of   Qi and Wei took the title of king. Fifth year: the  xishou,  a  native  of Yinjin, was promoted to the rank of daliangzao.46 Sixth year: Wei handed over the region of Yinjin to Qin.  Yinjin was renamed  Ningqin.
Seventh year: Gongzi Ang fought with  Wei,  capturing  the  Wei  general Long Jia and cutting off 80,000 heads.47 Eighth year: Wei handed over the territories west of the Yellow  River to Qin.  In the  ninth year, Qin crossed  the Yellow River and seized Fenyin and Pishi, met with the king of Wei at Ying, and besieged the city of Jiao, forcing its surrender. Tenth year: Zhang   Yi became prime minister of Qin. The state of Wei handed over the fifteen districts of Shangjun to  Qin.  Eleventh year:  the  region of Yiqu  was  made into a district; Qin returned the cities of Jiao and Quwo to the state of Wei. The ruler of Yiqu acknowledged fealty to the Qin ruler, and Shaoliang was renamed Xiayang. Twelfth year: the la festival was celebrated for the first time.48 Thirteenth year: on the day mouwu of the fourth month, the Wei ruler took the title of king, and the ruler of Hann also became a king. Qin dispatched Zhang Yi to seize the  city of Shan;  its inhabitants  were driven  out and handed over to Wei.
Fourteenth year: the Qin ruler began numbering  the  years  of  his  rule again, and this became the first year of the new numbering.49 Second year: Zhang Yi met with the chief officials of Qi and Chu at Niesang.  Third year:   the heirs apparent of the states of Hann and Wei came to Qin to pay their respects. Zhang Yi became  prime  minister  of Wei.  Fifth year:  the  king  of Qin journeyed to the northern bend of the Yellow River. Seventh year:  Yue Chi became prime minister of Qin. Hann, Zhao, Wei, Yan, and Qi,  leading a force of Xiongnu, joined in attacking Qin. Qin dispatched the militia leader Shuli Ji to do battle with them at  Xiuyu.  He  captured  their  general  Shen Cha, defeated the ducal son Ke of Zhao and the Hann heir apparent  Huan, and cut off the heads of 82,000 of the    enemy.50
Eighth year: Zhang Yi once more  became  prime  minister  of  Qin.  Ninth year: Sima Cuo attacked the state of Shu and wiped  it  out.  Qin  also  attacked and seized the Zhao cities of Zhongdu and Xiyang.  Tenth  year:  Cang, the heir apparent of the state of Hann, came to Qin as a hostage. Qin attacked and seized the  Hann region of Shizhang,  attacked and   defeated  
the Zhao general Ni, and attacked and seized twenty-five cities of Yiqu. Eleventh year: Shuli Ji attacked the Wei city of Jiao and forced it to  surrender. Qin defeated Hann at Anmen and cut off 10,000  enemy  heads;  the Hann general, a xishou, fled from the field. Tong, a son of the Qin ruler, was enfeoffed in Shu. The ruler of the state of Yan ceded his throne to his minister Zi Zhi.
Twelfth year: the king of Qin met with the king of Liang at Linjin.51 The militia leader Shuli  Ji  attacked  Zhao  and  captured  the  Zhao  general Zhuang. Zhang Yi became prime minister of Chu.  Thirteenth  year:  the militia leader Zhang attacked the  forces of Chu at Danyang,  captured the  Chu general Qu Gai, and cut off the heads of 80,000 of the enemy. He also attacked the Chu region of Hanzhong, seized an area of 600 li, and set up   the province of Hanzhong. When Chu besieged the  Hann city  of  Yongzhi,  Qin dispatched the  militia  leader  Shuli  Ji  to  go  to  the  assistance  of  Hann and proceed east to attack Qi. Qin also ordered Dao Man to assist Wei in attacking in Yan. Fourteenth year: Qin attacked Chu and seized Shaoliang, and Dan and Li acknowledged fealty to Qin. Zhuang, the prime minister of Shu, killed the marquis of Shu and came to surrender to Qin.
King Huiwen died and was succeeded by his son, King Wu. Hann, Wei, Qi, Chu, and Zhao all came to Qin as guests to offer their  support.
In his first year (310 BC) King Wu met with King Hui of Wei at Linjin.52    He put to death Zhuang, the prime minister  of  Shu.  Zhang  Yi  and  Wei  Zhang both left Qin and went east to Wei. Qin attacked Yiqu, Dan and Li. Nangong Jie  died.  Second year:  the  office  of chancellor  was set up.53  Shuli Ji and Gan Mou were appointed chancellor  of  the  right  and  left respectively. Zhang Yi died in Wei. Third  year:  King  Wu  met  with  King Xiang of Hann outside the city of Linjin. Shuli Ji became prime minister of Hann. King Wu said to Gan Mou, “I want to send my  war  chariots  through the region of the three  rivers and call on the  Zhou royal house.54  Then I  can die without regret.” That autumn he dispatched Gan Mou and  the  militia leader Feng to attack Yiyang. Fourth year: they overran Yiyang, cutting off 60,000 enemy heads, and then crossed the  Yellow  River  and  built defensive walls around Wusui. The heir apparent of Wei came  to the  Qin court.
King Wu of Qin was a very powerful man who loved  feats  of  strength. Persons noted for  their  physical  strength  such  as  Ren  Bi,  Wu  Huo,  and  Meng Yue all rose to high office under him. The king joined Meng Yue in a cauldron-lifting  contest  and  broke  his  knee-cap.  In  the  eighth  month  King Wu died and Meng Yue  and his family were all put  to   death.
King Wu had taken a daughter  of the Wei ruling house  as his queen, but   as she  had borne  him no  sons,  his  younger  brother  by a  different  mother  
was set up as ruler to succeed him. This was King Zhaoxiang. King Zhaoxiang’s mother, a member  of the Chu ruling family,  bore the surname  Mi and the title Queen Dowager Xuan. When King Wu died, King Zhaoxiang was a hostage in the state of Yan, but the men of Yan escorted him back to Qin so he  could become ruler.
In King Zhaoxiang’s first year (306 BC) Shuli  Ji  or  Lord  Yan  became prime minister. Gan Mou left Qin and went to Wei. Second year: a comet appeared. The militia leader Zhuang joined with the high ministers, marquises, and ducal sons of Qin in carrying out  a  revolt,  but  all were  put to death. Even including the consort of King Hui, all died unnatural deaths. The consort of King Wu left Qin and returned to her native state    of Wei.
King Zhaoxiang third year:  the  king  assumed  the  cap  of  manhood.  He met with the king of Chu at Huangji,  handing  over  the  region of Shangyong to Chu. Fourth year: Qin seized the city of Puban. A comet appeared. Fifth year: the king of Wei came to pay his respects to the Qin court at Yingting,  and Qin returned the  city  Puban  to  Wei.  Sixth  year:  Hui,  the  marquis  of Shu, revolted. Sima Cuo restored order to Shu. The militia leader Huan attacked Chu and cut off 20,000 enemy heads. The ducal son Shi, Lord Jingyang, was sent to Qi as a hostage.  There was an eclipse  of the  sun and    it grew dark at midday.  Seventh year:  Qin captured the  city  of Xincheng. Shuli  Ji died.
King Zhaoxiang eighth year: Qin sent its general Mi Rong to attack  Chu  and seize Xinshi. Qi dispatched Zhang Zi, Wei dispatched Gongsun Xi, and Hann dispatched Bao Yuan to make a joint attack on the Chu city of Fangcheng, in which they seized  the  Chu general  Tang  Mei.  Zhao destroyed the state of Zhongshan and its ruler fled, eventually dying in Qi. The ducal son Jing of Wei and the ducal son Chang of Hann became marquises.
King Zhaoxiang ninth year: Xue Wen, Lord Mengchang, came to Qin to become its prime minister. Huan attacked Chu  and  seized  eight  cities, killing the Chu general Jing Kuai. Tenth year: King Huai of Chu came to pay  his  respects at the  Qin court, where Qin detained him.  Xue  Wen resigned  the post of prime minister because of Jin Shou and Lou Huan became chancellor.55
King Zhaoxiang eleventh year: the five states of Qi, Hann, Wei, Zhao, and Song, along with Zhongshan, joined in an attack on Qin, advancing as far as Yanshi before withdrawing. Qin handed over the regions of Hebei and Fengling to Hann and Wei in order to make peace. A comet appeared. King Huai of Chu escaped and fled to Zhao, but Zhao refused to grant him asylum and sent him back to Qin, where he died. His body was returned to Chu for burial. Twelfth year: Lou Huan resigned and Wei Ran, marquis of  
Rang, became prime minister. Qin gave Chu 50,000 piculs of grain. Thirteenth year: Xiang Shou attacked  Hann  and  seized  Wushi.  The zuogeng Bai Qi attacked Xincheng.56 The fifth rank counsellor Lü Li  left  Qin and fled to the state of Wei.57 Ren Bi became governor of Hanzhong Province. Fourteenth year: the zuogeng Bai Qi attacked the Hann and Wei forces at Yique, cutting off 240,000 enemy heads, taking Gongsun Xi prisoner,  and capturing five  cities.
King Zhaoxiang fifteenth year: the daliangzao Bai Qi attacked Wei  and
seized Yuan, but then returned it. He attacked Chu and seized Wan. Sixteenth year:  Sima  Cuo  seized Zhi and Deng.  Wei  Ran resigned the  post of prime minister. Qin enfeoffed the ducal son Shi in Wan,  the  ducal son Kui in Deng, and Wei Ran in  Tao,  making  them  all  marquises.  Seventeenth year: Lord Chengyang came to the Qin court to pay respects,  and  the  Eastern Zhou ruler also came to court. Qin exchanged the city of Yuan for Puban and Pishi.  The  king  of  Qin  went  to  Yiyang.  Eighteenth  year:  Sima Cuo attacked Yuan, Heyong, and Jueqiao and seized them.
King Zhaoxiang nineteenth year (288 BC): the king of  Qin  became  Western Emperor and the ruler of Qi became  Eastern  Emperor.  Both  rulers then abandoned the titles.58 The fifth rank counsellor Lü Li returned to Qin. Qi destroyed the state of Song and the king of  Song  took  up residence in Wei. He died at Wen. Ren Bi died. Twentieth year: the king of  Qin visited Hanzhong.  He also  visited Shangjun and the  northern bend of  the Yellow River.
King Zhaoxiang twenty-first year: Sima Cuo  attacked the  Henei area of Wei. Wei presented the city of Anyi to Qin. Qin expelled the inhabitants and moved its own people to the area east of the Yellow River, bestowing noble ranks and pardoning criminals in order to  facilitate  the  move.  The  ducal son Shi, Lord Jingyang, was enfeoffed in Wan.  Twenty-second  year:  Meng Wu attacked Qi. Nine districts were created in the area east of the Yellow River. The Qin ruler met with the king of Chu at Wan, and with the king of Zhao at Zhongyang. Twenty-third year: the Qin commandant Sili  joined Hann, Wei, Zhao, and Yan in an attack on Qi, destroying Jixi.  The  Qin king met with the king of Wei at Yiyang, and with the king of Hann at Xincheng. Twenty-fourth year: the Qin ruler met with  the  king  of  Chu  at  Yan  and again at Rang. Qin seized the Wei city of Ancheng and advanced as far as Daliang, but Yan and Zhao came to its rescue and the Qin army withdraw.  Wei Ran resigned as prime minister.
King Zhaoxiang twenty-fifth year: Qin captured two of Zhao’s cities. The Qin ruler met  with the  king of Hann at Xincheng,  and with the  king of Wei at Xinming city. Twenty-sixth year: Qin pardoned criminals and moved them to  the   region  of  Rang.   Wei  Ran  resumed  the   post  of  prime   minister.  
Twenty-seventh year: Sima Cuo attacked Chu. Qin pardoned criminals and moved them to the region of Nanyang. Bai Qi attacked Zhao and seized the city of Guanglang in Dai. Qin also sent Sima Cuo to set out with troops from Longxi and, proceeding through Shu, to attack  Qianzhong,  which  he overran. Twenty-eighth year: the daliangzao Bai Qi attacked Chu and seized Yan and Deng. Criminals were pardoned and transported to those areas. Twenty-ninth year: the daliangzao Bai Qi attacked Chu and seized the Chu capital of Ying, which was made into Nan Province. The Chu king  fled. The Zhou ruler came  to Qin.  The  king of Qin met  with the  king of Chu at Xiangling. Bai Qi was made Lord Wuan.
King Zhaoxiang thirtieth year (277 BC): Ruo, the governor  of  Shu, attacked Chu and seized Wujun and Jiangnan, which were made into Qianzhong Province. Thirty-first year: Bai Qi attacked Wei and seized two cities. The people of Chu revolted in Qin’s region  of  Jiangnan. Thirty-  second year: the prime minister Wei Ran attacked Wei, advancing as far as Daliang. He crushed the forces of Bao Yuan,  cutting  off  40,000  enemy  heads; Bao Yuan fled. Wei presented Qin with three districts in a bid for peace.  Thirty-third year:  Hu Shang,  a  “guest  minister”  of Qin,59  attacked the Wei cities of Juan, Caiyang, and Changshe and seized them.  He carried  out a surprise  attack  on  Mang  Mao’s  forces  at  Huayang,  defeating  them and cutting off 150,000 enemy heads. Wei offered Nanyang to Qin in a bid  for peace. Thirty-fourth year: Qin gave Wei the Hann region of Shangyong and made it into a province. Officials who had been removed from office in Nanyang were transported there to take up   residence.
King Zhaoxiang thirty-fifth year (272 BC):  Qin aided Hann,  Wei,  and Chu in an attack on Yan. The province of Nanyang was set up. Thirty-sixth year: Zao, a guest minister of Qin, attacked Qi and seized Gang and Shou; these were handed over to Wei Ran, the marquis of Rang. Thirty-eighth year: the zhonggeng Hu Shang attacked the Zhao city of Eyu but was  unable  to seize it.60 Fortieth year: the Qin heir apparent Dao died  in Wei.  His  body was returned for burial in Zhiyang. Forty-second year: Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, attacked Hann and captured nine cities, cutting off 50,000 enemy heads. Forty-fourth year: Qin attacked Hann’s Nan Province and seized it. Forty- fifth year: the fifth rank counsellor Ben  attacked  Hann  and  seized  ten cities. The ducal  son Kui,  Lord Sheyang,  left  the  capital  to  proceed to  his fief, but died before arriving.
King Zhaoxiang forty-seventh year (260 BC): Qin attacked Hann’s region of Shangdang, which surrendered to  the  state  of Zhao.  Qin then launched an attack on Zhao. Zhao dispatched troops to meet the  attack,  and  for  a time they were stalemated. Qin then dispatched  Bai  Qi,  Lord  Wuan,  to press  the  attack,  and he  inflicted  a  crushing  defeat  on Zhao  at Changping,  
killing the entire force of over 400,000 men. Forty-eighth year: Hann presented the city of Yuanyong to Qin. The Qin army was divided into three parts. Bai Qi returned to Qin. Wang He led the forces of Qin in an attack on Zhao’s cities of Wuan and Pilao and captured them. Sima Geng proceeded north to take control of Taiyuan, gaining possession of all of Hann’s  region  of Shangdang.61 In the tenth month the fifth rank counsellor Ling attacked Zhao’s city of Handan. Forty-ninth year: in the first month Qin dispatched more troops to assist Ling, but Ling was unsuccessful in battle and  was relieved of his command, Wang He replacing him as  commander.  In  the tenth month the Qin general Zhang Tang attacked Wei, but his commander Cai abandoned his post and failed to stick by it; on return to Qin he was executed.
King Zhaoxiang fiftieth year (257 BC): in the tenth month Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, was accused of a crime, reduced to the rank of common soldier, and exiled to Yinmi. Zhang Tang attacked Zheng and captured it. In the twelfth month more troops were sent to reinforce the army outside the city of Fencheng. Bai Qi, Lord Wuan, was accused of  further  crimes  and  put  to death. Wang He  attacked  Handan  but  failed  to  capture  it.  He  withdrew and fled with his troops to  the  army  at  Fencheng.  Two  or  more  months later he attacked the Wei army, cutting off  60,000  enemy  heads.  The  bodies of 20,000 men of Wei and Chu washed down the Yellow River. Wang He attacked Fencheng and then joined  Zhang  Tang  in  capturing Ningxinzhong. Ningxinzhong was renamed Anyang. For the first time  a bridge was built across the Yellow   River.
King Zhaoxiang fifty-first year (256 BC): the Qin general Jiu  attacked  Hann, seized Yangcheng and Fumai, and cut off 40,000 enemy heads. He attacked Zhao and seized twenty or more districts, beheading or capturing 90,000 of the enemy. The Western Zhou ruler revolted against Qin and, entering into alliance with the other feudal rulers, led a force of  crack  troops drawn from all over the empire out of Yique in an attack on Qin, preventing Qin from maintaining contact with Yangcheng. Qin thereupon dispatched its general Jiu to attack Western Zhou. The Western Zhou ruler hastened to Qin to acknowledge his submission, bowing his head  in recognition of guilt and offering his entire territory of thirty-six cities and 30,000 inhabitants to Qin. The Qin king accepted the gift and sent the Zhou ruler back to his capital in Zhou. Fifty-second year: the Zhou people fled to the east and their sacred vessels, including the nine cauldrons, passed into  the hands of Qin.62  Thus the Zhou dynasty came to   an end.
Fifty-third year: the various rulers of the empire came  to Qin as guests,  but the ruler of Wei was the last to do so. Qin dispatched Jiu to attack Wei, seizing Wucheng.  When the  king  of  Hann came  to  the  Qin court,  the  state  
of Wei turned over its internal affairs to the direction of Qin. Fifty-fourth year: the king of Qin carried out the suburban sacrifice to the Lord on High  at Yong. Fifty-sixth year: in the autumn King Zhaoxiang died and was succeeded by his son, King Xiaowen. King Xiaowen honoured his deceased mother Tang Bazi with the title Queen Dowager Tang and had her body interred with that of the former king. The king of Hann donned mourning garments and came to Qin to offer condolences and sacrifice. The other feudal rulers all sent their prime ministers to Qin to offer condolences and sacrifice and to be present at the  burial   ceremony.
King Xiaowen first year (250 BC): criminals were pardoned, meritorious ministers of the former ruler  were  treated  with  generosity, and prohibitions on the use of parklands were relaxed. His mourning duties completed, King Xiaowen ascended the throne on the day jihai of the tenth month. Three days later, on the day xinchou, he died. He was succeeded by his son, King Zhuangxiang.
King Zhuangxiang first year (250 BC): many criminals were pardoned. meritorious ministers of the former ruler were honoured, generous awards were handed out to the ruler’s kin, and the people were treated with kindness. The Eastern Zhou ruler plotted with the  other  feudal  lords  to attack Qin, but the Qin prime minister Lü Buwei had him put to death and confiscated all his lands. Qin did not cut  off  the  Zhou sacrifices,  however,  but bestowed the region of Yangren on the Zhou ruler so  that  he  could carry on the sacrifices to his ancestor.63 Qin ordered Meng Ao to attack Hann; Hann handed over the regions of Chenggao and Gong. Thus Qin’s eastern boundary extended as far as Daliang and it set up the province of Sanchuan or Three Rivers. Second year: Qin ordered Meng Ao  to  attack Zhao and bring Taiyuan under control. Third year: Meng Ao attacked the  Wei cities of Gaodu and Ji and captured them. He also attacked the Zhao  cities of Yuci, Xincheng, and Langmeng, seizing thirty-seven cities. In the fourth month there was an eclipse of the sun.
King Zhuangxiang fourth  year  (247  BC):  Wang  He  attacked Shangdang and the province of Taiyuan was set up.  The  Wei  general  Wuji  led  the forces of five feudal states in an attack on Qin and Qin was forced  to withdraw beyond the Yellow River.64 Meng Ao suffered  defeat  and  his forces scattered and fled. In the fifth month, the day bingwu, King Zhuangxiang died and was succeeded by his son, Zheng, who became  the First Emperor of the  Qin.
In the twenty-sixth year of his rule (221 BC), King Zheng unified the empire, set up thirty-six provinces, and took the title Shihuangdi or First Emperor of the Qin dynasty.  He died in the fifty-first year of his rule (210  BC)  and  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Huhai,  who  is  known  as  the   Second  
Emperor. In the third year of his rule (207 BC) the feudal lords all rose in revolt against the Qin. Zhao Gao put to death the Second Emperor and set    up Ziying. After Ziying had been ruler for a little over a month, the feudal  lords executed him and thus wiped out the Qin dynasty. A discussion will be found in “The Basic Annals of the First   Emperor”.

The Grand Historian remarks: Qin’s ancestors belonged to  the  Ying  family, but later they were enfeoffed in various regions and took the names  of their respective  fiefs as their  surname.  Hence there was the  Xu family, the Tan family, the Ju family, the Zhongli family, the Yunyan family, the Tuqiu family, the Jiangliang family, the Huang family, the  Jiang  family,  the  Xiuyu family, the Baiming family, the  Feilian  family, and  the  Qin  family. But because the ancestor  of  the  Qin  family,  Zaofu,  had  been  enfeoffed  in  the city of Zhao, the  last became known as the  Zhao  family.
