SHI JI 6: THE BASIC ANNALS OF THE FIRST EMPEROR  OF  THE QIN

After the First Emperor became ruler, he united all Six States. He melted down the spears and used the metal to cast bells, putting aside shield and armour. He assumed an exalted title, calling  himself emperor, making a show of military might and relying on force. The Second Emperor succeeded to the line, but Ziying surrendered and became a prisoner. Thus I made “The  Basic Annals of the First Emperor of the Qin”.

The First Emperor of the Qin was a son of King Zhuangxiang of Qin. When King Zhuangxiang was a hostage for the state of Qin in Zhao, he happened to see a concubine belonging to Lü Buwei.65 Pleased with her, he took her for himself, and she bore the First Emperor. He was born in Handan in the first month of the forty-eighth year of King Zhaoxiang of Qin (259 BC). At his birth he was given the personal name Zheng; his family name was Zhao.66
When he was thirteen years old, King Zhuangxiang died and Zheng succeeded him as king of Qin. At this time Qin had already annexed the regions of Ba, Shu, and Hanzhong and extended its territory past Wan to Ying, where it set up Nan Province. In the north it had taken possession of the area from Shang Province east, which comprised the provinces of Hedong, Taiyuan, and Shangdang, and east as far as Xingyang,67 wiping out the two Zhou domains and setting up the province of Sanchuan or Three Rivers. Lü Buwei was prime minister and was enfeoffed with 100,000 households and the title of marquis of Wenxin. He had gathered a group of guests and wandering scholars, hoping to unite the world, and Li Si was one of his retainers. Meng Ao, Wang Ji, and Lord Biao commanded the army. As the king was still young and had just ascended the throne, he entrusted affairs of state to his chief ministers.
A revolt had arisen in Jinyang, and in the first year  of  the  new  ruler’s reign (246 BC) General Meng Ao attacked and brought it under control. In the second year (245) Lord Biao led the troops in an attack on Juan in Wei, cutting off 30,000 enemy heads. In the third year (244) Meng Ao attacked Hann and captured thirteen walled cities. Wang Ji died. In the tenth month General  Meng Ao  attacked the  Wei  cities  of  Chang  and  Yougui.  There was
 
a severe famine this year. In the fourth year (243) Chang and Yougui capitulated, and in the third month the army was  withdrawn.  The  Qin prince who had been a hostage in Zhao returned, and  the  Zhao  heir apparent left Qin and returned to his state. In the tenth month, on the day with the cyclical sign gengyin, swarms of  locusts  appeared from the  east  and darkened the sky. There was widespread pestilence. Commoners who contributed 1,000 piculs of grain to the government were granted one degree of noble rank.
In the fifth year (242) General Meng Ao attacked and seized control of the cities of Suanzao, Yan, Xu, Changping, Yongqiu, and Shanyang. In all he captured twenty cities. The province of Dong was set up. In winter there was thunder.
In the sixth year (241) the states of Hann,  Wei,  Zhao,  Wey,  and  Chu joined in attacking Qin and seizing Shouling. Qin called out its troops, whereupon the forces of the five states withdrew. Qin attacked Wey and advanced on Dong Province. The Wey ruler Jue led his followers and moved to the region of Yewang, where he blocked the mountains in  order  to protect the area of Wei north of the Yellow River.
In the seventh year (240) a  comet  appeared in  the  east  and  then  was seen in the north. In the fifth month it appeared in the west. General Meng  Ao died. He had attacked Long, Gu, and Qingdu and was returning with his troops for an attack on Ji. The comet appeared in the west once  more.  On the sixteenth day of the month Queen Dowager Xia    died.
In the eighth year (239) the king’s younger brother Chengjiao, Lord Chang’an, led troops in an attack on Zhao but  then revolted.  He was killed  at Tunliu. The officers of his army were all executed and the people  of Tunliu were ordered to be transported to Lintao. When the army commander Bi was killed, the people of Tunliu and Puhao once more revolted. They were killed and their corpses exposed.68 The Yellow River overflowed, strewing fish over the land.  People set  off  east  by  light carriage or horseback in search of food.
Lao Ai  was enfeoffed as marquis  of Changxin,  being assigned lands  east  of the mountains and  instructed  to  take  up  residence  there.69  He  had  a free hand in matters of palaces, dogs and horses, clothing,  parks,  and  hunting areas, and all affairs of state great and small were decided by him. The province of Taiyuan west of the Yellow River was also made part of his domain.
In the ninth year (238) a comet appeared, at times filling the sky. Qin attacked Yuan and Puyang in Wei. In the fourth month the king resided temporarily at Yong, and on the day jiyou he received the cap of manhood and put on girdle and  sword.
 
It was discovered that Lao Ai, the marquis of Changxin, was plotting revolt. He had forged the seals of the king and the queen dowager and called out the district troops. Supplementing these with soldiers of the guard, government horsemen, and the chiefs of the Rong and Di tribes and their henchmen, he was preparing to attack the Qinian Palace at Yong and start a revolt. When the king learned of this, he ordered the prime minister, Lord Changping, and Lord Changwen to call out troops and attack Lao Ai. Fighting took place in Xianyang and several hundred heads were cut off. All who cut off enemy heads were honoured with noble ranks, and all the eunuchs who joined in the hostilities were awarded one degree of noble rank. Lao Ai and the others fled in defeat.
An order was circulated throughout the kingdom offering 1,000,000 cash to anyone who captured Lao Ai alive, and 500,000 cash to  anyone  who killed him. Lao Ai  and  his supporters  were  all  seized.  Twenty  men, including the  commandant  of  the  guard,  Jie,  the  prefect  of  the  capital,  Si, the lancer of the left, Jie, and the chief of palace counsellors, Qi, were all beheaded and their heads exposed. Lao Ai was torn in two by carriages to serve as a warning and his clan was wiped out. Among his followers, those only slightly involved were assigned to provide “firewood for the spirits”.70 Over 4,000 families were deprived of noble rank and transported to Shu, being resettled in Fangling.
In the fourth month it was so cold that people froze  to  death.  Yang  Duanhe attacked Yanshi. A comet appeared in the west,  then  appeared  again in the north, moving south from the Dipper  for eighty   days.
Tenth year (237): the prime minister Lü Buwei was implicated in the Lao Ai affair and removed from his post. Huan Ji became a commander of the army. Envoys  from Qi and Zhao  arrived and a  banquet  was held.  Mao Jiao, a man of Qi, spoke to the king of Qin, saying,  “Qin  these  days  thinks  in  terms of the empire as a whole. But word has it that  Your Majesty  has moved your  mother, the queen dowager, to another  location.  I fear that if  the other feudal rulers hear of this, they will take it as a  reason to turn against Qin.”71
The king thereupon went to Yong to fetch the queen dowager and bring  her back to Xianyang. Later he arranged for her to reside at the Palace of Sweet Springs. A great search was made for aliens and they were ordered expelled from the state. But when Li Si submitted a  memorial  arguing against the move, the order for the expulsion of aliens was rescinded.72
Li Si took the opportunity to urge the king of Qin to first take over  the  state of Hann in order to terrify the other states. The king accordingly sent  Li Si to negotiate the surrender of Hann.  The  king of Hann,  distressed at  this, plotted with Han Fei to weaken Qin’s power.
 
A man named Wei Liao from Daliang came to Qin and spoke to the king, saying, “Qin’s might is such that the rulers of the other states are like mere heads of a province or a district beside it. My only fear is that  the  other rulers will form an alliance and join in some unexpected move. That is just how Zhi Bo, King Fuchai, and King Min of  Qi  met  with  their  downfall.  I  hope Your Majesty will not be sparing of goods and money but will hand out bribes to their leading ministers so as to disrupt their  schemes.  By laying  out no more than 300,000 in gold, you  can  completely  undo  the  other feudal  rulers!”
The king of Qin decided to follow this advice. When he received Wei Liao, he treated him as an equal and shared his clothing and food and drink with him. Later Wei Liao remarked, “The king of Qin, with his arched nose and long eyes, puffed-out chest like a hawk and voice of a jackal, is a  man of  scant mercy who has the heart of a tiger or a wolf. When he is in difficulty    he readily humbles himself before others, but when he has gotten his way, then he thinks nothing of eating others alive. I am a mere commoner, yet when he receives me he always acts as though he were my inferior. But if    the king of Qin should ever get his  way  with  the  world,  then  the  whole world will end up his prisoner. It doesn’t do to stay around a man like that  for long!”
He was about to leave, but the king of Qin, learning of his plans, managed to stop him, appointing him a state commandant. In the end he made use of Wei Liao’s schemes, which Li Si put into effect.
Eleventh year (236): Wang Jian, Huan Ji, and Yang  Duanhe  attacked Ye  and seized nine cities. Wang Jian attacked Eyu and Laoyang. Their forces were all combined into one army, which Wang Jian commanded for eighteen days. When the army returned, two out of every ten men  in  the  lower  ranks then went into action again. They seized Ye  and  Anyang,  this  time with Huan Ji in command.
Twelfth year (235): the marquis of Wenxin, Lü Buwei, committed suicide and was buried in secret. It was decreed that any of his retainers who observed mourning for him, if men of Wei, Hann, or Zhao, were to be banished; and if men of Qin and of the  600 picul  rank or  above, they were  to be deprived of noble rank and transported. All retainers who  were men  of Qin and of the 500 picul rank or below, whether they mourned or not, were to be transported but not deprived of noble rank. “From now on if there are persons like Lao Ai or Lü Buwei who conduct state affairs in an unprincipled manner, their property shall be confiscated and their family members made government slaves. Take note of this!”73
In autumn the followers of Lao Ai who had been transported to Shu were recalled.  At  this  time   there  was  a  great  drought  throughout  the   empire
 
which lasted from the sixth to the eighth month, when rain finally   fell.
Thirteenth year (234): Huan Ji attacked  Pingyang  in  Zhao,  killed  the Zhao general Hu Zhe, and cut off 100,000 enemy heads.  The  king  journeyed to the area south of the Yellow River. In the first month a comet appeared in the  east.  In the  tenth month Huan Ji attacked Zhao.
Fourteenth year (233): Qin attacked the Zhao army at Pingyang, stormed Yian and captured it, and killed its general. Huan Ji seized control of Pingyang and Wucheng. Han Fei came as an  envoy  to  Qin. The  king, heeding the advice of Li Si, detained him. Han Fei died at  Yunyang.74  The  king of Hann requested that he be allowed to become a subject of the Qin ruler.
Fifteenth year (232): large numbers of troops were called up. One army advanced as far as Ye, another advanced to Taiyuan and seized Langmeng. There was an earthquake.
Sixteenth year (231): in the ninth month troops were  dispatched  to  accept control of the Hann region of Nanyang, with  the  prefect  of  the capital Teng as acting magistrate. For the first time men were ordered to register according to their ages. Wei presented territory  to  Qin; Qin founded the city of Li.
Seventeenth year (230): the prefect of the capital Teng attacked Hann, seized King An of Hann, and took over all of his territory. The region was made into a province with the name Yingchuan. There was an earthquake. Queen Dowager  Huayang died.  The people  suffered from severe famine.
Eighteenth year (229): large numbers of troops were called up to attack Zhao. Wang Jian led the forces from Shang Province in subjugating Jingxing, Yang Duanhe led the forces from north of the Yellow River, and Qiang Hui attacked Zhao. Yang Duanhe surrounded the city of Handan.
Nineteenth year (228): Wang Jian and Qiang Hui seized complete control of all the Zhao territory and at Dongyang captured the king of Zhao. Then they led their troops on in preparation for an attack on the state of Yan, encamping at Zhongshan.
The king of Qin journeyed to Handan, where he put to  death  all  the persons who had been enemies of his mother’s family when he was growing up in Zhao. He then returned to Qin, going back by  way  of Taiyuan  and Shang Province. The queen dowager, the mother of the First  Emperor, passed away. Gongzi Jia, a member of the Zhao ruling family, led several hundred members of his clan to the region of Dai, where he set himself  up as king of Dai and,  joining  his  troops  in alliance  with those  of  Yan  to  the east, encamped at Shanggu. There was severe  famine.
Twentieth year (227): Crown  Prince  Dan  of  Yan,  fearful  that  the Qin troops   would   march   against   his  state,   in   desperation   sent   Jing   Ke  to
 
assassinate the king of Qin. When the king learned of the  plot,  he  had Jing  Ke torn limb from limb to  serve  as a  warning.  Then he  dispatched Wang Jian and Xin Sheng  to attack Yan.  Yan  and Dai called out  their  forces and  fell on the Qin army, but the Qin army defeated Yan west of the Yi River.
Twenty-first year (226): Wang Pen attacked the Yan capital of Ji. Meanwhile, more and more troops were sent  to  reinforce  Wang  Jian’s army, so that eventually he defeated the army of Crown Prince  Dan, captured the Yan capital  of  Ji,  and  seized  the  Crown  Prince’s  head.  The king of Yan took control of the region of Liaodong and made himself king of  it. Wang Jian asked leave to return to his home on grounds of old age and illness. A revolt broke out in Xinzheng. Lord Changping was transferred to Ying. There was a severe snowstorm, the snow piling up to a depth of two feet  five inches.
Twenty-second  year  (225):  Wang  Pen  attacked  Wei,  leading  water  from the Yellow River to flood the Wei capital of Daliang. The walls of  Daliang collapsed and the king of Wei asked permission to surrender. All  of  his  territory was seized.
Twenty-third year (224): the king of Qin summoned  Wang  Jian,  requesting him to make  a  special  effort  to  return to  active  duty.  He  sent him to lead troops in an attack on Jing.75 He seized the region from Chen south to Pingyu and took the king  of Jing captive.  The  king  of Qin visited Ying and Chen. The  Jing  general  Xiang  Yan  set  up  Lord Changping  as  the new king of Jing and held the region south of the Huai River  in  revolt  against  Qin.
Twenty-fourth year (223): Wang Jian and Meng Wu attacked Jing and smashed the Jing army. Lord Changping was  killed  and  Xiang  Yan committed suicide.
Twenty-fifth year (222): large numbers of troops were called out and Wang Pen was ordered to attack the Yan region of Liaodong. He captured King Xi of Yan.  On his way back he attacked Dai and took prisoner King Jia   of Dai. Wang Jian meanwhile finished seizing control of the region of Jing south of the Yangtze River. He forced the capitulation of the Yue  ruler and   the province of Kuaiji was set up in the region. In the fifth month a great  feast was held throughout the whole domain.
Twenty-sixth year (221): King Jian of Qi and his prime minister  Hou  Sheng dispatched troops to defend the western border of the state and prevent the Qin forces from passing through.  Qin  ordered  General  Wang Pen to march south from Yan and attack Qi. He seized King Jian of Qi. With this Qin succeeded in bringing all of the states under its rule.
The king  of  Qin  instructed  the chancellor and  the imperial  secretary, saying,  “In the  past  the  king  of  Hann relinquished  his  territory  and handed
 
over his royal seals, requesting to become a  vassal.  Later,  however,  he went back on his promise and allied himself with Zhao and Wei to defy Qin. Therefore I called out troops to punish him, taking the    king prisoner.
“I believed that things had been set right and hoped I could lay aside my arms. The king of Zhao then sent his prime minister Li Mu to conclude an  oath of alliance, and I accordingly sent back the son who  had  been  a  hostage here. But the king violated his oath and turned against  me at Taiyuan, so I called out troops to  exact  punishment  by  seizing  the  king. Then, because Gongzi Jia of Zhao set himself up as king of Dai, I called up troops to attack and wipe him out.
“The king of Wei at first promised to be submissive to Qin, but later he joined Hann and Zhao in plotting to attack Qin, so the Qin officers and men were sent in punishment, and they destroyed him. The  king  of Jing offered me the territory from Qingyang westward, but later he broke his promise    by attacking my Nan Province. So I called out troops to punish him, seizing the king and taking control of the Jing territory.
“The king of Yan was stupid and unprincipled, and his heir, Crown Prince Dan, secretly sent Jing Ke on a mission of evil, but my troops punished them and wiped out their country. The king of Qi, heeding the schemes  of Hou Sheng, broke off relations with Qin, hoping to start  a  rebellion,  but  my troops punished him, taking the king prisoner and restoring order  to  the land of Qi.
“Insignificant person that I am, I have called up troops to punish violence and rebellion. Thanks to the help of the ancestral spirits, these six  kings have all acknowledged their guilt  and the  world is  in profound order.  Now if some change in title is not carried out, there will be no way to celebrate these achievements and make them known to later generations. Let deliberations be held on an imperial  title.”
The chancellor Wang Wan, the imperial secretary Feng Jie, and the commandant of justice Li Si all replied: “In ancient times the Five Emperors possessed domains that were 1,000 li square. Beyond were the feudal lords who were submissive and the barbarians who were submissive. Of the feudal lords, some came to pay respects at court and some did not, but the Son of Heaven could not force his will on them.
“But now Your Majesty has raised troops to punish the evil and remiss, brought peace to the world, made the entire area within the seas into provinces and districts, and insured that  laws  and  rulings  shall  proceed from a single authority. From highest antiquity to the present, such a thing has never occurred before, nor could the Five Emperors equal it. We have respectfully consulted with the court scholars, who tell us that in antiquity there  was  the  Heavenly  August,  Earthly  August,  and  Greatly  August, of
 
which the Greatly August was the most exalted. Therefore on pain of death we venture to propose this title, namely, that the king shall be  known as Greatly August. His commands shall be known as edicts and his orders as decrees, and the Son of Heaven shall refer  to  himself  by  the  pronoun  zhen.”
The king said, “We will drop the Greatly, keep the August, and adopt the title used by the emperors of high antiquity, calling ourselves Huangdi or August Emperor. Other matters shall be as in the proposal.” Thus he gave     his approval to the decree. He honoured his father, King Zhuangxiang,  with the posthumous title of Grand Supreme August.
An edict was issued, saying: “We have heard that in high antiquity there were titles but no posthumous names. In middle antiquity there were titles, and posthumous names were assigned after the death of a person on the basis of his actions. This results in the son passing judgment on the father, and subjects passing judgment on their ruler. Such a procedure is highly improper and we will have none of it! From now on, this  manner of  assigning posthumous names shall be abolished. We ourselves  shall  be  called First Emperor, and successive generations of  rulers  shall  be numbered consecutively, Second, Third, and so on for 1,000 or 10,000 generations, the succession passing down without end.”
The First Emperor believed that the Five Powers succeed each other in unending cycle, and he held that the  Zhou dynasty  had ruled by the  power  of fire. Since the Qin had replaced the Zhou, its power should therefore proceed from that which fire cannot overcome; the power of  water  had  now begun its era of dominance.76 He changed the time for the court celebrations marking the beginning of the year, holding them all on the first day of the tenth month, and all clothing, flags, and pennants honoured the colour black. Among numbers, six was the standard, so that tallies  and  official caps were six inches, carriages were six feet, six feet were taken to make up one pace, and carriages were drawn by six horses.  He  also  changed the name of the Yellow River, calling  it  “Powerful  Water”  to indicate that the era of the power of water had begun. Only by being stern and severe, by settling all affairs in the light of the law,  by  cutting  and slashing without  mercy  or  gentleness,  he  believed,  could  he  comply  with the destiny decreed by the Five Powers. Hence he  assiduously  applied the law and refused to pardon even crimes committed far in the   past.
The chancellor Wang Wan and others stated the opinion that, since the feudal rulers had  just  recently  been defeated and  the  regions  of  Yan,  Qi, and Jing were situated far  from  the  capital,  unless  kings  were  set  up  in such regions it would be impossible to control them. They therefore requested that sons of the ruler be set up, if the emperor would be so  kind
 
as to give  his approval.
The First Emperor referred  the  proposal  to  the  ministers  for deliberation. The ministers all indicated their  approval.  But  the commandant of justice Li Si voiced this opinion: “Kings Wen and Wu of the Zhou dynasty enfeoffed a great many of their sons, younger brothers, and other members of their own surname. Later, however, these men became increasingly estranged and even fell on one  another  like  sworn  enemies, and when the feudal rulers attacked each other  in this  manner,  the  Zhou Son of Heaven was helpless to restrain them. Now, thanks to the spiritual might of the sovereign, all the area within the seas has been united under a single rule and made into provinces and districts.  If the  sons  of the  ruler  and the ministers who have won merit are rewarded with generous gifts from the public taxes, that will be quite sufficient. They can be easily controlled, and the world will be without dissension. This is the  correct method for insuring peace. To establish feudal rulers would not  be expedient.”
The First Emperor said, “It was because of the marquises and kings that  the world suffered so long from unending strife and warfare. Now thanks    to the aid of the ancestral spirits, the world has at last been pacified. If the feudal states are re-established, this will  encourage  the  use  of  arms.  To hope for peace and tranquillity under such circumstances will be difficult indeed! The view of the  commandant  of justice  is correct.”
Thus the empire was divided into thirty-six provinces, each province provided with a governor, a military commandant, and a superintendent. The common people were renamed “black-headed ones”. There was great feasting. Weapons from all over the empire were confiscated, brought to Xianyang, and melted down to be used in casting bells, bell stands, and twelve men made of metal. These last weighed 1,000 piculs each and were set up in the palace.77 All weights and measures were standardized, the gauge of wheeled vehicles was made uniform, and the writing system was standardized.
The empire extended east to the sea and to Chaoxian (Korea), west to Lintao and Qiangzhong, and south to Beihu. In the north fortresses were established along the Yellow River and then over the Yin Mountains to Liaodong.
Rich and powerful families from all over the empire, 120,000  families, were moved to Xianyang. The various ancestral temples, as well as the Zhangtai Palace and Shanglin Park, were all  situated  south  of  the  Wei  River. And whenever Qin would wipe out one of the feudal states, it would make replicas of its halls and palaces and  reconstruct  them on the  slope north of Xianyang,  facing south over  the  Wei.  From Yongmen  east  to the
 
Jing and Wei rivers, mansions, elevated walks, and fenced pavilions succeeded one another, all filled with beautiful women and bells and drums that Qin had taken from the feudal   rulers.
Twenty-seventh year (220): the emperor toured Longxi and Beidi, going  as far as Chicken Head Mountain and returning by way  of  Huizhong.  He built the Xin Palace south of the Wei River and then  renamed  it  Apex  Temple in imitation of the Heavenly Apex.78 A road was opened up from Apex Temple to Mt. Li, where the Front  Hall  of  the  Palace  of  Sweet  Springs was built. A walled road was constructed for the emperor running from Xianyang to connect with it.  This  year  officers  were  advanced  one step in rank and fast roads were  constructed.79
Twenty-eighth  year (219):  the emperor  visited   the   provinces   and districts of the east and ascended Mt. Yi in Zhuo. He set  up  a  stone  marker and, consulting with the Confucian scholars of  Lu,  had  it  inscribed  with  praises of the virtue of the Qin. He also consulted  with  the  scholars  on matters pertaining to the Feng and Shan sacrifices  and  sacrifices  to  the various mountains and  rivers. Afterward  he  ascended  Mt. Tai,  set  up  a stone marker, and performed the Feng sacrifice. On the way down, he encountered violent wind and rain and  had  to rest under  a tree. He accordingly enfeoffed the tree with the title of fifth rank counsellor. He performed the Shan sacrifice  at Liangfu  and  set up  a stone  marker  inscribed with these  words:80
The August Emperor mounted the throne, issuing edicts, clarifying laws, which his subjects observe and obey.
In the twenty-sixth year of his rule  he  first  united  the  world;  there  were none who did not come to him in   submission.
In person he visited the people of distant regions, ascending Mt. Tai, surveying the eastern extremity all around.
The ministers in his retinue, mindful of his  deeds,  seeking the  source  of his achievements, reverently praise his merits and virtue.
The way of good government is implemented, the various  occupations obtain what is needful, all is gauged by law and pattern.
His great principles are noble and pre-eminent, to be bestowed on future generations, who will receive and honour them without change.
The August Emperor, sage that he is,  has  brought  peace  to  the  world, never neglectful of his rule.
Early rising, late to retire, he takes measures to bring lasting benefit, devoting himself earnestly to instruction and  precept.
His admonitions circulate, his proclamations spread abroad, so that near and far alike are properly ordered, and all bow to the will of the sage.
Eminent   and   humble   are   clearly   distinguished,   men   and   women  are
 
observant of ritual, cautious and attentive to their   duties.
Inner and outer concerns are carefully demarked, uniformly faultless and pure, to be passed on to future   heirs.
His transforming influence is unending, in ages after his decrees will be honoured, handed down forever with gravest  caution.
The emperor then proceeded  east  from  Bohai,  passed  through  Huang and Chui, climbed to the top of Mt.  Cheng,  and ascended Mt.  Zhifu,  setting  up a stone praising the virtue of the Qin. He then went south to ascend Mt. Langya, which delighted him so greatly that he remained there for three months. He ordered 30,000 households of the black-headed people to be moved to Langya Terrace, exempting them from taxation and labour services for a period of twelve years.
Having constructed the Langya Terrace, he set up a stone praising the virtue of the Qin and making clear its accomplishments. It said:
In his twenty-eighth year the  August  Emperor made  a new   beginning.
He adjusted the laws and regulations, standards for the ten thousand things.
He clarified human concerns, bringing concord to father and son,
sage, wise, benevolent and righteous, making plain the principle of the Way.
In the east he toured the eastern lands, inspecting their officers and men, and when his tasks were grandly completed, he  gazed down on the   sea.
The	merit	of	the	August	Emperor	lies	in  diligently	fostering   basic concerns,
exalting agriculture, abolishing lesser occupations, so the black-headed people  may be rich.
All under  heaven are of one mind, single in  will.
Weights and measures have a single standard, words are written in a uniform way.
Wherever sun and moon shine, where ships and wheeled vehicles bear cargo,
all fulfil their allotted years, none who do not attain their    goal.
To initiate projects in season — such is the August Emperor’s way. He rectifies diverse customs, crossing rivers, traversing the land.
He	pities	the	black-headed	people,	morning	and	evening	never neglectful.
He erases doubt and establishes laws, so all will know what to shun. Local officials have their respective duties; order is achieved with ease. Decisions are certain to be just, none not clear as a drawing.
The August  Emperor in his enlightenment  scrutinizes the  four   quarters.
 
Exalted, lowly, eminent or humble never overstep their proper    course.
Evil	and	wrongdoing	are	not	permitted;	all	practise	goodness	and integrity.
Exerting utmost strength in matters great and small, none dare to be lax  or remiss.
Near and far, in remotest comers, they strive to be strict and thorough.
Upright, honest, fervent and loyal, they are  constant  in  devotion  to  duties.
The August Emperor’s virtue preserves and brings calm to the four extremes.
Punishing disorder, dispelling harm, he furthers benefit and calls down  good fortune.
His frugal undertakings are timely, so that all occupations prosper and multiply.
The black-headed people are at peace, never needing to take up arms.
The	six	kinships	guard	one	another,	ever	free	from	bandits	and marauders.
All delight in honouring instructions, complete in their knowledge of the laws.
Within the six directions, the domain of the August Emperor, west to the flowing sands, south all the way to   Beihu,
east to the eastern sea, north beyond Daxia,
wherever human tracks may reach, there are none who are not his subjects.
In merit he tops the Five Emperors, his bounty reaching oxen and horses, none  untouched by the ruler’s virtue, each at rest in his   home.
The king of Qin, having unified all under heaven,  adopted  the  title  of August Emperor. Then he toured the eastern lands, going as far as Langya. The ranged marquises, the marquis of Wucheng, Wang Li, and the marquis    of Tongwu, Wang Pen; the marquises without fief the marquis of Jiancheng, Zhao Hai, the marquis of Changwu,  Cheng, and  the  marquis  of  Wuxia, Wang Wuze; the chancellors Wei Zhuang and Wang Wan; the ministers Li Si and Wang Wu; and the fifth rank counsellors Zhao Ying and Yang Jiu, having accompanied the emperor and deliberated together by the sea, spoke thus: “The emperors of ancient times had domains that did not exceed 1,000 li, and the feudal lords guarded their own fiefs, sometimes coming to court to pay respects, sometimes not. All attacked one another in violence and disorder, never ceasing their assaults, yet they inscribed bronze and stone with records of their deeds. The Five Emperors and Three Kings of  antiquity, though aware that their teachings were  not  identical  and  that  their  laws  and  regulations  were  unclear,  relied  on  the  authority  of the
 
spirits and gods to deceive the people of distant regions. But because the reality did not accord with their claims, they were unable to continue for  long. Even before their lives had come to an end, the feudal lords turned on them in revolt, and their commands ceased to be observed.
“But now the August Emperor has unified the whole area within the seas, making it into provinces and districts and bringing peace to  all  under  heaven. He has shed light on the ancestral temples, embodying the Way, enacting virtue, and fulfilling his exalted title. His various officials join together to praise the merit and virtue of the  August  Emperor, inscribing it on metal and stone so that it may be a model and standard.”
After the stone had been set up, a native of Qi named Xu Fu and others submitted a memorial saying that in the midst of the sea were three spirit mountains named Penglai, Fangzhang, and  Yingzhou,  with immortals  living on them. They asked that they be allowed to fast and purify themselves and to go with a group of young boys and girls to search for them.
The emperor thereupon ordered Xu Fu to gather a group  of  several thousand young boys and girls and set out to sea to search for the immortal  men.
The First Emperor returned by way of Pengcheng, where he fasted and purified himself and performed sacrifices, hoping to recover the cauldrons   of Zhou from the Si River. He ordered 1,000 persons to dive into the water and search for them, but they could not find them.81
He then proceeded southwest across the Huai River to Mt. Heng and Nan Province. Floating down the river, he reached the shrine at Mt. Xiang. There he encountered strong winds and was almost unable to get across the river. He questioned his academicians, saying, “What sort of deity is  the Mistress of the Xiang?”
The academicians replied, “They say she was the daughter of Emperor Yao and the wife of Emperor Shun and that she is buried here.”
The First Emperor, enraged,  ordered  3,000 convict   labourers   to   cut down all the trees on Mt. Xiang,  leaving it  denuded.  Then he  returned from Nan Province  by way of the  Wu Pass.
Twenty-ninth year (218): the First Emperor journeyed east, and when he reached Bolangsha in Yangwu he was  frightened  by  bandits.  Having searched for them and failed to apprehend them, he ordered the entire empire to carry out a great search for ten days.82
He ascended Mt. Zhifu and had a stone inscribed with these words:
The twenty-ninth year, the season of mid-spring, when the gentle warmth is rising:
The August Emperor journeyed east and in his travels ascended  Zhifu, gazing down upon the  sea.
 
The ministers in his retinue, pondering the source of his magnificence, recall with praise the beginning he made.
The great sage initiated order, establishing laws and regulations, making manifest his rules and standards.
Abroad he instructed the feudal rulers, shedding the light of cultured blessing, enlightening them with the principles of righteousness.
The Six States were recalcitrant, insatiable in greed and perversity, pillaging and slaughtering endlessly.
The August Emperor, pitying the multitude, called  out  his chastising armies, brandishing his military power.
Through righteous punishment, trustworthy  acts, he  displayed his  might  in all quarters, till there were none who failed to submit.
He wiped out the powerful and unruly, rescuing the black-headed people, bringing peace to the four corners of the empire.
Far and wide he dispensed his enlightened laws to bind and regulate all under heaven, to stand as a model unending.
How  great, that  throughout  the whole universe the will   of   the   sage should be  heeded and obeyed!
The host of officials praise his merits, begging to inscribe them on stone,   to be handed down as an unchanging pattern.
The inscription for the eastern tour   read:
In the twenty-ninth year the August Emperor set forth  in  spring, inspecting and visiting the  distant  regions.
Advancing to the brink of the sea, he ascended Mt. Zhifu, gazing down at the morning sun.
The vista was vast and beautiful, and the ministers in his retinue all pondered, searching out  the  source  of his  supreme enlightenment.
When the sage’s laws were first promulgated, they brought purity and order within the borders and punished the unruly and powerful beyond them.
His  warlike  might  was  brandished  on  wide,  shaking  the  four  corners  of the  land;  he  took captive  the  kings  of the Six States.
Uniting all under heaven, he put an end to harm and disaster, and then for all time he laid aside his arms.
The bright virtue of the August Emperor aligns and orders the whole universe;  he  sees and listens without tiring.
He has established his great righteousness, providing all with the implements required, each with his own badge and pennant.
Office holders have the honour due them, each understands his duties, so  all proceeds without ill-feeling or  doubt.
The  black-headed  people  have  undergone  transformation,  near  and   far
 
share a single rule, an achievement far surpassing antiquity.
Constant occupations have been fixed, heirs hereafter will carry on the tasks, insuring continuance  of the  sage’s  good order.
The host of officials rejoice in his virtue, respectfully praising the sage’s magnificence,  and beg to set up this  inscription at  Zhifu.
On his way back the emperor went to Langya and then from Shangdang returned to the  capital.
The thirtieth year  (217): passed without  incident.
Thirty-first year (216): in the twelfth month the la festival was renamed Rejoicing in Peace.83 The black-headed people were  rewarded  with  six piculs of grain and two sheep for each   community.
The First Emperor went out incognito in the city of  Xianyang,  accompanied only by four armed men. Going out at night, he encountered bandits at Lanchi and his life was threatened, but the  armed  guards attacked and killed the bandits. A thorough search was made in the area within the passes for twenty  days.
One picul of grain cost 1,600 cash.
Thirty-second year (215): the First Emperor journeyed to Jieshi, where  he commissioned a native of Yan named Scholar Lu to go in search of the immortals  Xianmen and Gaoshi.  He had an inscription carved on the  gate  of Jieshi which read:84
He called out his armies to punish the unprincipled, and the workers of evil have been wiped clean.
His arms cut down the violent and contentious, his civil arts restored the guiltless, and the hearts of the multitude are submissive.
Generously he judged merit and worth, his rewards  extending  to  oxen and horses, and his bounty fattened the   land.
The August Emperor displayed his might, his virtue brought together the feudal lords, for the first time bestowing unity and peace.
He demolished walls and fortifications, opened  up waterways,  cut through embankments, and levelled the steep declivities.
When the shape of the land had been fixed, the masses were freed from corvée labour, and all the empire was comforted.
Now men delight in their tasks, women pursue their occupations, each affair ranged in proper order.
His bounty extends to every occupation,  all have  their  allotted work in the fields, none without a place of rest.
The host of  officials  praise  his  magnificence,  begging  leave  to  inscribe this stone, that his example may be made  known to future    ages.
At this time  the  emperor  dispatched Han Zhong,  Lord Hou, and Master
 
Shi to search for the immortals and their herbs of everlasting life. The First Emperor, having toured the northern border region, returned to the capital by way of Shang Province.
Master Lu, a native of Yan, who had been sent out to sea, returned and, claiming that it had come to him from the gods and spirits, submitted a document that said: “Qin will be destroyed by Hu.”85 The First Emperor thereupon ordered General Meng Tian to call out 300,000 troops and lead them north to strike at the Hu barbarians. The general invaded and seized the area south of the bend of the Yellow   River.
Thirty-third year (214): a number  of men who had absconded in the past,  had been adopted  into  their  wife’s  family,  or  were  shopkeepers,  were  sent  to  invade  and  seize  the  Luliang  region.86  The  provinces  of  Guilin,  Xiang,   and Nanhai were created and convicts sent to garrison them.  In the northwest the Xiongnu were driven back and the region from Yuzhong east along the Yellow River was joined with Mt.  Yin, being divided up into thirty-  four districts.  Fortifications  were built along  the river to protect   the border.
Meng Tian was also ordered to cross the Yellow River and seize Gaoque, Mt. Tao, and Beijia. Outposts were constructed in order  to  drive  out  the Rong people, and convicts were transported to the region to populate the new districts. It was forbidden to offer sacrifices  to  the  Morning  Star.  A comet appeared in the western sky.
Thirty-fourth year (213): officials in charge of  lawsuits  who  had  been  unjust in their dealings were transported to the Great Wall to work at its construction,  or  to  the  region  of  Southern Yue.
The First Emperor set out wine in his palace in Xianyang, and seventy academicians assembled in his presence to wish him long life. The archery captain Zhou Qingchen stepped forward and spoke these words of praise: “In former times Qin’s territory did not exceed 1,000 li. But Your Majesty, through your spiritual power and enlightened sageness, has pacified all within the seas and driven out the Man and Yi barbarians. Wherever the sun and moon shine there is no one who does not come in submission. The domains of the feudal lords have been made into provinces and districts. Each person finds rest and happiness, free from the threat of warfare, such blessings to be handed down for 10,000 generations. Since the highest antiquity there has been nothing to equal Your Majesty’s might and virtue.” The First Emperor was delighted. But another academician, a man of Qi named Chunyu Yue, came forward and said: “I have heard that the kings of the   Yin   and   Zhou   dynasties ruled  for	1,000  years  or	more,  for	they enfeoffed their sons and younger brothers and their meritorious ministers to  aid and  support  them.  Now  Your  Majesty  possesses  all within  the seas,
 
yet your sons and  younger  brothers  are  mere  commoners.  If  a  Tian  Chang or the six great ministers of Jin  should  suddenly  appear,  you  would  be  without support or assistance, and how could you be saved?87 I have  never heard of any undertaking that  failed to imitate  the  example  of antiquity and  yet was able to endure for long!  And  Zhou  Qingchen  by  flattering  you  to  your face is simply compounding Your Majesty’s error — he is  no  loyal  subject!”
The First Emperor referred the  matter  to  his  ministers  for  discussion. The chancellor Li Si said: “The Five  Emperors did not  imitate  each other,  the Three Dynasties did not carry on each other’s ways, yet each was well governed. It was not that they rejected one another, but that the times changed.
“Now Your Majesty has initiated this great  undertaking,  establishing  merit that will last 10,000 generations. This is not the sort of thing that a stupid Confucianist would understand! Chunyu Yue has spoken of the Three Dynasties, but why should they be worth taking as a model? In other times the feudal rulers vied with one another in inviting  wandering scholars  to their courts and treating them generously. But now all under heaven has been pacified and laws and ordinances proceed from a single source. The common people in their homes devote their efforts to  agriculture  and  crafts, while gentlemen study the laws and ordinances and practise how to avoid prohibitions.
“But nowadays scholars, instead of looking to the present, study antiquity in order to criticize their own age, misleading and confusing the black- headed people. As chancellor, your servant Li Si must speak out on pain of death. In the past the empire was fragmented and in confusion and no one was able to unite it. Therefore the feudal rulers rose up side by side, all of them declaiming on antiquity in order to disparage the present, parading empty words in order to confuse the facts. Men prided themselves on their private theories and criticized the measures adopted by their superiors.
“Now the August Emperor has unified all  under  heaven,  distinguishing black from white and establishing a single source of authority. Yet these adherents of private theories band together to criticize the laws and directives. Hearing that an order has  been  handed  down,  each  one proceeds to discuss it in the light  of his  theories.  At  court  they disapprove in their hearts; outside they debate it in the streets. They hold it a mark of fame to defy the ruler, regard it as lofty to  take  a  dissenting  stance,  and they lead the lesser officials in fabricating slander. If behaviour such as this   is not prohibited, then in upper circles the authority of the ruler will be compromised, and in lower ones cliques will form. Therefore it should be prohibited.
 
“I therefore request that all records of the historians other than those of the state of Qin be burned. With the exception of the academicians whose duty it is to possess them, if there are persons anywhere in the empire who have in their possession copies of the Odes, the Documents, or the writings of the hundred schools of philosophy, they shall in all cases deliver them to the governor or his commandant for burning. Anyone who ventures to  discuss the Odes or Documents shall be executed in the marketplace. Anyone who uses antiquity to criticize the present shall be executed along with his family. Any official who observes or knows of violations and fails to report them shall be equally guilty. Anyone who  has  failed  to  burn  such books within thirty days of the promulgation of  this  order  shall  be subjected to tatoo and condemned to ‘wall dawn’ labour.88 The books that are to be exempted are those on medicine, divination, agriculture, and forestry. Anyone wishing  to  study  the  laws and ordinances  should  have  a law official for his teacher.”
An imperial decree granted approval of the proposal.
Thirty-fifth year (212): a road was opened up from Jiuyuan to Yunyang, mountains  being cut  through and valleys  filled up  so  that  the  road could run in a  straight line.
The First Emperor felt that, in view of the large population of Xianyang,  the palace of the former  kings  of  Qin  was  too  small.  “I  have  heard,”  he said, “that King Wen of the Zhou had his capital at Feng, and King Wu had      his at Hao. The area between Feng and Hao is fit for the capital of an  emperor or a king.” He accordingly began construction of a state palace in  the Shanglin Park south of the Wei River. First  he built  a  front  hall  at  Epang which measured 500 bu from east to west and fifty  zhang  from north to south.89 The upper part could seat 10,000 persons, and  in  the lower part flag poles five zhang high could be  erected.  It was surrounded  by covered walks which then led from the hall directly south to  the  Southern Mountains. The summit of  the  Southern  Mountains  was designated to be the gate of the palace. An elevated walk extended from Epang north across the Wei River to connect the palace with Xianyang, in imitation of the way in which in the heavens a corridor leads from the Heavenly Apex star across the Milky Way to the Royal Chamber star.
The palace at Epang had not been completed at this time. The emperor intended to select  some  appropriate  name  for  it  when it  was  completed, but meanwhile, since it was being built at a place called Epang, everyone referred to it as the Epang Palace. Over 700,000 persons condemned to castration and convict labourers were called up, part of them being put to work building the Epang Palace and part assigned to Mt. Li.90 Stone was quarried from the northern hills and timber transported from the  regions
 
of Shu and Jing, all being brought to the site.
In the area within the passes there were a total of 300  palaces,  while beyond the passes there were more than 400.  The  emperor  had a  stone  set up at Qujie on the eastern sea, declaring that it was the eastern gate of Qin. He had 30,000 households transported to the town at Mt. Li,  and  50,000 households to Yunyang, exempting them all from taxes and corvée labour for a period of ten  years.91
Master Lu said to the First Emperor, “I and the others have searched for zhi fungus, rare herbs, and the immortals, but we can never seem to encounter them. There would appear to be some entity that is blocking us. The magic arts teach that the ruler of men should at times move about in secret so as to avoid evil spirits.  If evil spirits are avoided, one  can reach   the status of True Man. If the  whereabouts of the  ruler  of men are known  to his ministers, this hinders his spiritual power.  A  True  Man  can  enter water without getting wet, enter fire without getting burned, soar over the clouds and air, and endure as long as heaven and earth. But  now  Your Majesty, though ruling the whole world,  has  not  yet  been  able  to  attain calm and quietude. When you are in the  palace,  do  not  let  others  know where you are. Once  that is done, I believe that the  herbs of immortality  can be obtained.”
The emperor said, “I long to  become  a  True  Man.  From now  on I  will refer to myself as True Man and will not call myself zhen.”
He then had elevated walks and walled roads built to connect all the 270 palaces and scenic towers situated within the 200 li environs of Xianyang. He filled the palaces with curtains and hangings, bells and drums, and beautiful women, each assigned to a particular post and forbidden to move about. Anyone revealing where the emperor was visiting at any particular moment was put to  death.
The First Emperor visited the palace at Mt. Liang and happened to look down from the mountain and observe the carriages, outriders,  and attendants of the chancellor. He was not pleased. One of the eunuchs  reported this to the chancellor, who thereafter reduced the number of his carriages and outriders. The First Emperor was furious, saying, “Someone among the eunuchs is leaking word of what I say!” He  examined  the  eunuchs, but none would confess to the  crime.  He then ordered the  arrest  of all those who had been in attendance, and had every one put to death. From that time on, no one knew where  he  was when he  was absent from the palace. Whenever he listened to reports or passed on decisions to his officials, it was always done at the palace in Xianyang.
Master Hou and Master Lu plotted together, saying, “The First Emperor    is by nature  obstinate, cruel, and self-willed.  He rose    up from among the
 
feudal rulers to unite the entire empire, and now that he has achieved his ends and fulfilled his desires, he believes that there has never been anyone like him since remote  antiquity.
“He entrusts everything  to  the  law  officials,  and  the  law  officials  alone are allowed into his presence. Although seventy  men have  been appointed as academicians, they are mere figureheads and are never consulted. The chancellor and the other major officials are all handed decisions that have already been made, and they simply second the emperor’s opinion. The emperor delights in showing his authority by punishing and killing, and everyone throughout the empire dreads punishment and tries merely to maintain his position, none daring to exert true loyalty. The emperor never learns of his mistakes and hence grows daily more arrogant, while his underlings, prostrate with fear, flatter and deceive him in order to curry favour.
“Qin law forbids a person to practise more than one kind of magical art, and if he fails to show results, he is summarily put to death. There are 300 men who practise the art of  divining  by  the  stars  and  exhalations,  all  of them experts, but they are so terrified of giving offence that they merely flatter the ruler and do not dare speak out and tell him his faults. All the affairs of the empire, great  and  small,  are  decided  by  the  emperor.  He even has the documents weighed, making certain that each day and night produces a picul’s weight of them. He will not  rest until  they  come  up to  that weight! When he is as greedy for authority and power as this, we can never hope to search out  the  herbs of immortality!”  They accordingly  fled in secret.
When the First Emperor was informed of this, he was enraged. “In the past,” he said, “I  confiscated all the  books from the  empire  and got  rid of  all those that were of no use. I also summoned a great many  learned  scholars and practitioners of various magic arts, hoping to initiate an era of great peace. The magicians said they wanted to employ  their  skills  to  search for rare herbs. But now Han Zhong has disappeared without any report, and Xu Fu and the others, after expending countless tens  of thousands of cash, have never been able to obtain the herbs,  and  daily  I hear reports that they are merely scheming  for  illicit  gain.  I  have  shown the utmost generosity in showering Master Lu and the others with honours and gifts, but now they speak slanderously  of me  so as to exaggerate my lack of virtue. I have also directed people to question the various scholars residing in Xianyang, and it appears that some  are  spreading  dubious stories in order to mislead the black-headed people!”
He then ordered the imperial secretary to subject all the scholars to investigation.  The  scholars  reported  on  one  another  in  an  attempt    to
 
exonerate themselves. Over 460 persons were convicted of violating the prohibitions, and were executed at Xianyang, word of it being publicized throughout the empire so as to act as a  warning  to  later  ages.92  In  addition, increasing numbers of convicts were transported to the border regions.
The First Emperor’s eldest son  Fusu  remonstrated  with  him,  saying, “The empire has just been set at peace and the black-headed people in  distant regions have not yet been won over. The scholars  all  praise Confucius and take him as a model. But in all affairs Your Majesty emphasizes the place of law and employs it as a corrective. I fear this may cause unrest in the empire.  I hope  you will give this some   thought.”
The First Emperor,  angered, sent  Fusu north to supervise  the  activities  of Meng Tian in Shang   Province.
Thirty-sixth year (211): Mars lodged in the mansion of the Heart Star. A meteor fell on Dong Province, turning into a  stone  when  it  reached  the ground. One of the black-headed people inscribed on the stone: “The First Emperor  will  die  and  his  land  be  divided.”  When  the  First  Emperor  heard of this, he sent the imperial secretary to  investigate,  but  no  one would  confess to the deed. In the end the emperor had all the persons living in the vicinity of the stone seized and put to death, and had the stone burned and pulverized.
The First Emperor, much disquieted, ordered the academicians to compose a poem on the immortals and on the True Man, which also described the emperor’s travels throughout the empire. It was distributed and musicians were designated to sing the poem to musical accompaniment.
In the autumn an envoy returning from east of the Hangu Pass reported that as he was passing along the Pingshu road in Huaiyin at night a man carrying a jade disc blocked the way, saying, “Give this to the  lord of Hao Lake for me.” He also said, “This year the primal dragon will die.”
When the envoy asked the meaning of  this,  the  man  suddenly disappeared, but he left the jade disc behind. The envoy  accordingly presented the disc along with his report.
The First Emperor listened in silence and then after a  long  time  said, “These mountain spirits cannot predict anything beyond the events of a  single year!” But after he had retired from court, he said,  “The  primal  dragon must  mean the leader  of men.”93
The emperor  ordered  the imperial  treasury to examine the jade  disc. They found that it was one that had been cast into the Yangtze when the emperor crossed the river on a tour in his twenty-eighth year. The First Emperor    had   divination   made    by   the    milfoil    stalks   and   the    response
 
indicated that a journey would be  propitious.
Thirty thousand  households  were  ordered  moved  to  Beihe  and  Yuzhong and  granted  one  step  in  noble rank.
Thirty-seventh year (210): in the tenth month, on the day guichou (Nov. 1), the First Emperor set out on a trip. The chancellor of the left Li Si accompanied him, while the chancellor of the right Feng Quqi remained in   the capital. The emperor’s youngest son Huhai, whom he was very fond of, asked to be allowed to go along, and the emperor gave him permission.
In the eleventh month the emperor reached Yunmeng, where he gazed at Mt. Jiuyi from afar and sacrificed to the sage ruler Yu Shun. Then he sailed down the Yangtze to view Jike, crossed Haizhu, passed Danyang,  and  arrived at Qiantang, overlooking the Zhe River. Because the waves on the river were so high, he went 120 li to the west and crossed the river at a narrower point. He climbed Mt. Kuaiji and  sacrificed  to  the  sage  ruler Great Yu. Gazing far off at the southern sea, he  erected a stone  inscribed  with praises of the virtue of the Qin. The text read:
The August Emperor in  his magnificence pacified  and  united the universe; his virtue and bounty are long lasting.
In his thirty-seventh year he toured the empire in  person,  viewing  the  distant  regions  all around.
He ascended Mt. Kuaiji, examining customs and folkways, and the black- headed people were circumspect and respectful.
The host of officials praise his merits, tracing the source of his undertakings, thinking back on his lofty enlightenment.
The sage of Qin rules the nation, for the first time defining penalties and names, making clear the old regulations.
For the first time he adjusted the  laws  and  precedents  and  delineated  offices  and responsibilities  in order  to  establish constant procedures.
The kings of the Six States, bent only on rebellion, greedy, cruel, and rapacious, led their hosts, certain of their power.
Violent, unruly, they acted wilfully, trusting to strength in their arrogance, again and again fielding their troops.
They exchanged envoys in secret, forming an alliance against us, acting in evil fashion.
Within the state they disguised their plotting, abroad they  came  to plunder  our  borders, and in time brought disaster on  themselves.
Through the power of righteousness our ruler  chastised  them,  obliterating the lawless and disorderly, wiping out and destroying the brigands.
The virtue of the sage is vast and all-inclusive; throughout the  six directions it sheds unbounded blessing.
 
The August Emperor has united the universe, he lends ear to manifold affairs, near and far are universally cleansed.
He tends to a multitude of matters, examines and  verifies  their  substance, so that each bears the name it deserves.
He has cognizance of both eminent and lowly, good and bad are ranged before him, nothing remains hidden from sight.
Those who gloss over error in the name of righteousness,  women with sons who remarry, unchastely turning against the dead -
Such conduct he bars at home and  abroad,  prohibits  unlicensed  behaviour, so that men and women are pure and honest.
If a husband behaves in bestial fashion, killing  him  will  incur  no  guilt;  thus are men made to embrace righteousness.
If a wife runs away and remarries, her sons shall disown their mother; so all will be led to clean and upright conduct.
His great rule purifies the folkways, the whole empire acknowledges its sway; it blankets the world in splendid regulation.
All honour his rules and maxims, harmonious,  peaceful,  and  diligent;  there are none who do not heed his command.
The  black-headed  people  are  orderly  and  virtuous,  individuals  delighting in a  common rule,  rejoicing in and guarding  the  great  peace.
Posterity will obey his laws, his constant  governance  knowing  no  end,  like  carriages and boats that never  overturn.
The officials in his retinue praise his brilliance, begging to inscribe this stone; may its glorious message shine through the ages.
On his way back the emperor passed through Wu, crossed the Yangtze at Jiangcheng, and followed north along the seacoast to Langya.
Xu Fu and the other magicians who had set out to  sea  in search of the herbs of immortality had passed several years without finding anything, consuming huge sums of money. Fearful of punishment, they deceived the emperor by saying, “The herbs of Penglai can surely be  obtained.  But  always there are large fish that cause difficulty, and  therefore  we  are  unable to reach the island. We would like  to request  that  a  skilled archer  be assigned to accompany us so that if we sight any fish, he can shoot at  them with a repeating  crossbow.”
The First Emperor dreamed that he was struggling with an ocean god who had the shape of a human being. When he consulted an academician who was an interpreter of dreams, he said, “The water god himself cannot be seen, but he may manifest himself in the form of a large fish or dragon. Now Your Majesty conducts sacrifices with great diligence, and yet this evil god has appeared. It must be driven away so that the good gods can appear.”
 
The emperor ordered that those who set out to sea should carry along equipment for seizing a gigantic fish. He himself carried a  repeating crossbow and watched for a great fish to appear so he could shoot it. He proceeded north from Langya as far as Mt. Rongcheng but  saw  nothing. When he reached Zhifu, however, he saw several huge fish and shot and  killed one of them. He then followed along the shore, turned west, and had gone  as far as Pingyuan Ford when he  fell  ill.
The First Emperor hated any talk of dying, and none of his officials dared even allude to the matter of death. When  his  illness  grew  increasingly  grave he wrote a letter under the imperial seal to be sent to his son, Prince Fusu, saying, “When mourning is announced, proceed to  Xianyang  and  carry out the burial.” The  letter  had  already  been  sealed  and  deposited with Zhao Gao, chief of the office of imperial carriage, who had charge of official seals, but it had not yet been entrusted to a messenger.
In the seventh month, the day bingyin,94  the First Emperor passed away at the Ping Terrace in Shaqiu or Sand Hill. Because the emperor had died outside the capital, the chancellor  Li  Si  feared that  the  other  princes  and their supporters in the empire  might  start  an uprising,  and  therefore  he kept the matter secret and did not announce a period of mourning.
The coffin was placed in a carriage that could be opened up for  cooling     or closed for warmth, with the ruler’s  oldest  and  most  trusted  eunuchs riding in attendance. At each stopping place, food was delivered to the carriage. The various officials continued as  before  to  submit  matters  for the emperor’s approval, and at such times the eunuchs would immediately approve them and hand them down from the closed carriage. Only the emperor’s son Huhai, Zhao Gao, and five or six  of  the  trusted  eunuchs  knew that the emperor had  died.
Zhao Gao had in the past instructed Huhai in  matters pertaining  to writing, criminal investigations, and laws and regulations, and Huhai was very friendly with him. Zhao Gao accordingly joined with Prince Huhai and the chancellor Li Si in plotting in secret, destroying the sealed letter that the emperor had prepared to be sent to Prince Fusu. They then forged a testamentary  edict  that  was  supposed    to  have	been  received  by  the chancellor Li Si from the emperor at Shaqiu which designated Huhai as heir apparent. They also prepared a new letter to be sent  to Prince Fusu and Meng Tian, accusing them of various crimes and ordering them to commit suicide. (A fuller discussion will be found in The Biography of Li Si.) The party proceeded from Jingxing to Jiuyuan, but as the weather was hot,  the body of the emperor in the closed carriage began to smell. An imperial order was issued to the accompanying officials ordering them to load each of  their  carriages  with  a  picul’s  weight  of  dried fish  so  as  to
 
disguise the odour. In this way they proceeded by the Straight Road to Xianyang, where the mourning was announced. The heir apparent Huhai ascended the  throne and is known as the  Second  Emperor.
In the ninth month the First Emperor was interred at Mt. Li. When the emperor first came to the throne he began digging  and  shaping  Mt.  Li.  Later, when he unified the empire, he had over 700,000 men from all over  the empire transported to the spot. They dug down to the third layer of underground springs and poured in bronze to make the outer  coffin.  Replicas of palaces, scenic towers, and the hundred  officials,  as  well  as  rare utensils and wonderful objects, were brought to fill up the tomb. Craftsmen were ordered to set up crossbows and arrows, rigged so they would immediately shoot down  anyone  attempting  to  break  in.  Mercury was used to fashion imitations of the hundred rivers, the Yellow River  and the Yangtze, and the seas, constructed in such a way that they seemed to  flow. Above were representations of all the heavenly bodies, below, the features of the earth. “Man-fish” oil was used for lamps, which were calculated to burn for a long time without going out.95
The Second Emperor said, “Of the women  in  the  harem  of  the  former ruler, it would be unfitting to have those who  bore  no sons  sent elsewhere.” All were accordingly ordered to accompany  the  dead  man, which resulted in the death of many women.
After the interment had been completed, someone pointed out that the artisans and craftsmen who had built the tomb knew what was  buried  there, and if they should leak word of the treasures, it would be a serious affair. Therefore, after the articles had been placed in the tomb, the inner gate was closed off and the outer gate lowered, so that all the artisans and craftsmen were shut in the tomb and were unable to get out. Trees and bushes were planted to give  the  appearance of a  mountain.
First year of the reign of the  Second  Emperor  (209):  the  Second Emperor was twenty-one. Zhao Gao as chief of palace attendants was entrusted with the handling of state affairs. The Second Emperor handed down a decree ordering an increase in the sacrifices  in  the  mortuary  temple of the First Emperor and the rituals observed in sacrifices to the rivers, mountains, and the various other deities. He instructed the officials    to discuss proper ways of paying honour to the temple of  the  First Emperor.
The officials all bowed their heads and replied: “In ancient  times the  Son of Heaven had seven mortuary temples, the feudal lords five, and the grandees three. Now the First Emperor has  his  Apex  Temple,  which  will never be destroyed though 10,000 generations may pass.96  All  regions within the  four  seas send articles of tribute  to  it,  the  sacrifices have   been
 
increased, and all the rituals are thoroughly carried out — there is nothing more to add. As for the mortuary temples of the former kings of Qin, some are situated to the west in Yong and some are in Xianyang. The Son of  Heaven should consider  it his duty to offer libations and sacrifices only in  the temple of the First Emperor. The temples of the Qin rulers from Duke Xiang on down should be destroyed, so that only seven temples remain in existence.97 The various officials should make offerings and sacrifices in these according to ritual, and should honour the temple  of  the  First Emperor by calling it the Temple of the Imperial Ancestor. The emperor should also resume the practice of referring to himself  by  the  pronoun zhen.”
The Second Emperor plotted with Zhao Gao,  saying,  “I,  the sovereign (zhen), am still young and have just ascended the throne,  and  the black-  headed people are not yet won over to me. The former emperor made progresses through the provinces and districts in order  to display his  might  and cause all within the seas  to  be  awed  and  submissive.  Now  if  I  do  not make a similar progress in  a  self-assured  manner,  they  will  regard  me  as weak and I will have  no  way to make them serve me  as subjects   should!”
In the spring the Second  Emperor  journeyed  to  the  provinces  and districts of the east, with Li Si accompanying him.  When he reached Jieshi,  he proceeded south along the seacoast to Kuaiji.  He added inscriptions to   all the stones that the First Emperor had earlier set up, on the side of the stone listing the names of the high officials who  had  accompanied  the  former sovereign in order to make manifest  his merits  and accomplishments and his outstanding virtue.  The inscription  read:
The emperor said: “These inscriptions on metal and stone were all made  by the First Emperor. Now we have succeeded to the title of emperor, but since the inscriptions on metal and stone do not contain the words ‘First Emperor’, there is a danger that after a  long  time  has  passed  it  may  appear as though the inscriptions were made not by the First Emperor but  by one of his later heirs, and this will not serve to praise his merits and accomplishments and his outstanding virtue.”
We, the chancellors Li Si and Feng Quqi and the imperial secretary De, therefore brave death by requesting that the words of this imperial decree be inscribed on the stones so as to make this fact clear. We brave death by making this request. An imperial decree granted approval of the request.
The emperor went as far as Liaodong and then returned to the    capital.
The Second Emperor respected Zhao Gao and heeded his advice in  applying the laws and ordinances. He plotted with Zhao  Gao  in  secret, saying,  “The  chief  ministers  are  unsubmissive,  the   various  officials    still
 
have great power, and the other imperial princes are certain to contest my rule. What can I do?”
Zhao Gao replied, “I have long wanted to speak of this, but had not ventured to do so. The chief ministers of the former emperor are all men of eminent families that have been famous throughout the empire for ages, families that have piled up merit and passed these offices along from generation to generation for many years. I, on the other hand,  come  originally from a humble background, but Your Majesty has been  kind enough to raise me up and assign me to a high position where I  can  supervise the affairs of the palace.  The  chief ministers  are disgruntled at this. In outward appearance they may seem compliant enough, but at heart they do not truly submit.
“Now Your Majesty has just been on a tour, but you did not make  use  of  the opportunity to examine the governors and military commandants of the provinces and districts and punish those who are guilty of some crime. By doing so you can strike terror into the empire as a whole, and at the same time do away with those who disapprove  of your  actions.  This  is  not  the time to seek your model in the arts of peace but to decide all through brute power. I beg Your Majesty to follow along with  the  times  and  not  be  in doubt. There is no need to consult with  the  host  of  officials.  The enlightened ruler raises up those people who would otherwise be overlooked. The humble he makes eminent, the poor  he enriches,  the distant he draws close to him. Then those both high and low can be  won  over and the nation will be  secure.”
“Excellent!” said the Second Emperor, and he proceeded to impose punishments on the chief ministers and the imperial princes, accusing them  of crimes and errors and arresting even petty officials close to the ruler or the three categories of palace attendants, so that no one was certain of his position.
Six of the imperial princes were put to death at Du.  Only  Prince  Jianglü  and his two brothers, who were held prisoner in  the  palace  while  their crimes were being investigated, were left alive.  The Second Emperor sent     a messenger to them, saying, “You have  failed  to  act  as  proper  subjects, and for this crime you deserve death. The officials have been instructed to carry out  the law!”
Jianglü said, “In matters of court ritual I have never ventured to disobey  the director of the guests, in taking  my  place  in  the  hall  of  state  I  have never ventured to overstep my position, in accepting and responding to commands I have never ventured to use improper  language.  How have  I failed to act as a proper  subject?  I wish to be informed of my crime  before  I die!”
 
The messenger replied, “I am not authorized to  discuss  such  matters  with you. I receive my instructions and carry them out!”
Jianglü looked up to heaven and cried out to it in a loud voice three times, saying, “This is Heaven’s doing! I have committed no crime!” The three brothers all wept bitterly as they drew their swords and took their own lives.
The members of the imperial family shook with  terror.  Those  officials who remonstrated were all accused of slander. The  high  officers  merely clung to their posts and endeavoured to ingratiate themselves, while the black-headed people trembled with fear.
In the fourth month the Second Emperor, having returned to  Xianyang from his tour, announced: “The former emperor regarded the court at Xianyang as too small, and therefore began building a palace at Epang. Before the halls could be completed, however, the ruler passed away. Construction there was halted and workmen assigned to supply dirt for the mound at Mt. Li.  The project at Mt. Li has been carried to completion, and    if we do not now finish construction of the  palace at Epang, it will appear     as though the former emperor was mistaken in his undertakings.”
Work was accordingly resumed on the Epang Palace, while on the foreign front efforts were continued to subdue the barbarians on the four borders, all as the First Emperor had originally planned. Fifty  thousand  crossbowmen were called up from all over the empire and assigned to garrison and protect Xianyang, where they were to give instruction in archery. It was estimated that they and their dogs, horses,  and  other  animals would require large amounts of food and that  food supplies  would be insufficient. An order was circulated to the provinces and districts instructing them to send supplies of beans, millet, grass, and fodder to the capital. All persons transporting the supplies were ordered to  bring  their own rations with them. Within a radius of 300 li of Xianyang, farmers were forbidden to consume their own grain. Thus the laws and regulations  became increasingly severe.
In the seventh month Chen She and others of his band of garrison troops revolted in the old territory of Jing, calling themselves “Magnifiers of Chu”. Chen She set himself up as king of Chu,  with  his  residence  in  Chen,  and  sent out his generals to seize control of the lands  east  of the  mountains.  The young men of the provinces and  districts,  having  suffered  under  the Qin officials, all murdered the governors and commandants or the magistrates and aides of their respective provinces  and  districts  and declared themselves a part of Chen She’s  revolt.  Countless  numbers  of them, having appointed themselves marquises or kings, joined forces and turned their eyes west, declaring their intention to attack the Qin.
 
When a master of guests who had been sent east on official business returned from the area, he reported the rebellion to the Second Emperor. The Second Emperor, enraged, had him turned over to the law officials for punishment. Thereafter, when envoys arrived and the emperor questioned them, they would reply, “Just a bunch of bandits. The governors and commandants of the provinces are now in the process of pursuing and capturing them. They’ll have them all in no time — there is no need to worry!” Then the emperor would be pleased.
Meanwhile Wu Chen set himself up  as king of Zhao,  Wei  Jiu became  king of Wei, Tian Dan became king of Qi, the governor of Pei started his uprising in Pei, and Xiang Liang raised an army in the  province  of  Kuaiji.
Second year (208), winter: Zhou Zhang, a military leader who had been dispatched by Chen She, pushed west as far as Xi with a force of several hundred thousand soldiers. The  Second  Emperor,  greatly  alarmed, consulted with his officials, saying, “What’s to be done?”
Zhang Han, the  privy  treasurer,  said,  “The  bandits  are  already close  by in great numbers and force. There is no time to  call  up  forces  from the nearby districts.  There are many  convict  labourers at Mt.  Li.  I would like to ask that they be pardoned and given arms so they can be used for an attack.”
The Second Emperor thereupon issued a general amnesty to the empire and ordered Zhang Han to lead the attack. Zhang Han struck at  and  defeated Zhou Zhang’s army and sent it fleeing, and eventually killed Zhou Zhang at Caoyang. The Second Emperor sent Sima Xin and Dong Yi, chief officials in the office of the chancellor, to assist Zhang Han in his attacks on the bandits.  They  killed  Chen  She  at  Chengfu,  defeated  Xiang  Liang’s forces at Dingtao, and wiped out Wei Jiu at Linji. By this time all the outstanding bandit leaders in the region of Chu were dead, and so Zhang  Han led his forces north across the Yellow River to  attack  Zhao  Xie,  the king of Zhao, and his followers at Julu.
Zhao Gao advised the Second Emperor,  saying,  “The  former  emperor ruled the world for a long period of time and therefore his officials did not dare act wrongfully or speak nonsense. But now Your Majesty is young in years and you have just come to the throne. Why discuss matters with the high ministers when making decisions? If you should make an error in judgment, you would look bad in the eyes of the officials.  The  Son  of  Heaven refers to himself by a special pronoun, zhen, because his own voice  is never heard.”98
Accordingly  the  Second  Emperor  remained  within  the  inner  recesses  of the  palace  and  decided  affairs  in  consultation  with  Zhao  Gao.  Thereafter the  high ministers seldom had an opportunity to see him at   court.
 
The bandits and brigands continued to grow in numbers, and troops were endlessly called up from the area within the passes and sent east to attack them. The chancellor of the right Feng Quqi, the chancellor of the  left Li Si,  and General Feng Jie came forward to remonstrate with  the  emperor, saying, “East of the pass, bands of brigands rise up in one  place  after  another, and though the Qin has dispatched  troops  to  attack  and  punish them, and though great numbers have been killed, still there is no end to them. Bandits are so numerous solely because of the burdens of garrison duty, the transportation of supplies, and other types of construction and corvée labour, and because taxes are so heavy. We request  that  construction work on the Epang Palace be suspended and that garrison and transport duty for the four frontiers be reduced.”
The Second Emperor said, “I have heard  from  Master  Han that  emperors Yao  and Shun did not plane the speckled beams of their palaces    or trim the thatch of their roofs; they ate their rice from earthen pots and sipped soup from earthen jars. Even the lot of a gatekeeper could not have been as cramped as theirs. Emperor Yu chiselled through Dragon Gate and opened up Daxia, fixing the courses of the rivers and allowing the water to flow to the sea. In person he took up plough and spade, labouring till there was no more hair on his shins. Even the toil of a slave taken prisoner in the wars could not have been more arduous than his.99
“The reason people think it an honour to hold possession of the empire is that one may indulge his desires and carry out his wishes to the full. If the ruler takes care to clarify the laws, then those  under  him will not  dare to  act wrongly and all within the four seas will be well governed. But if rulers like Shun and Yu, though honoured with possession of the empire, must impose hardship and labour on themselves so as to set an example for their people, then what good are  laws?
“I am honoured with the title of lord of ten thousand chariots,  but  I  do  not enjoy the reality. Now I want to be provided with 1,000 chariots, to be attended by 10,000, so that I can live up to my name and title!
“The former emperor rose up from among the feudal lords to unite the empire. After the empire had been set at rest, he drove back the four barbarian tribes in order to bring peace to the border regions, and he built halls and palaces as a symbol of his success. You, my lords, must have seen how his great accomplishments have  been carried  on.
“Now, during the two years when I have been on the throne, bands of robbers have risen in one place after another, and you have not been able    to suppress them. Moreover, you want to  put  a  halt  to  the  former emperor’s enterprises. On a higher level you are failing to repay the debt  you owe the former emperor, and on a secondary one you are not exerting
 
your utmost loyalty and strength for my sake! Why then should you remain in your posts?”
He had Feng Quqi, Li Si, and Feng  Jie  handed  over  to  the  law  officials, who subjected them to examination to see if they  were  guilty  of  other crimes as well. Feng Quqi and Feng Jie said,  “Generals and ministers  must  not endure such disgrace!” and they committed suicide. Li  Si  was  put  in prison and sentenced to the  five  penalties.
Third Year (207): Zhang Han and the other Qin generals led troops and surrounded the city of Julu. Xiang Yu, the  supreme  general  of  the  Chu forces, went to the rescue of Julu.
In the winter Zhao Gao became chancellor and, concluding the investigation of charges against Li Si, had him executed.
In the summer Zhang Han fought with the Chu troops and several times suffered defeat. When the Second  Emperor  dispatched  envoys  to  berate him, he grew fearful and sent  the  chief  official  Sima  Xin to the  capital to  ask for further instructions. But Zhao Gao refused to see him or to believe   his account of events.  Alarmed,  Sima  Xin  fled from the  capital.  Zhao  Gao sent men to overtake and arrest him, but they were too late.
When Sima Xin reappeared before Zhang  Han,  he said,  “Zhao  Gao handles all affairs in the palace. You will be put to death, General, whether you are successful in battle or   not!”
Xiang Yu pressed his attacks on the Qin army and took the Qin general Wang Li prisoner. Zhang Han and the others then surrendered with their troops to the leaders of the  states.
Eighth month, the day jihai (Sept. 27): Zhao Gao was contemplating treason but was afraid the other officials would not heed his commands, so he decided to test them first. He brought a deer and presented it to the Second Emperor but called it a horse. The Second Emperor  laughed  and said, “Is the  chancellor  perhaps mistaken, calling a deer  a   horse?”
Then the emperor questioned those around him. Some remained silent, while some, hoping to ingratiate themselves with Zhao Gao, said it was a horse, and others said it was a  deer.  Zhao  Gao  secretly  arranged for  all those who said it was a deer to be brought before the law. Thereafter the officials were all terrified of Zhao   Gao.
Earlier, Zhao Gao had several  times  advised  the  emperor  that  the bandits east of the pass were incapable of  causing  serious  trouble.  But  after Xiang Yu captured the Qin general Wang Li at  Julu  and  began advancing, the armies of Zhang Han and the  others  suffered  repeated  defeat and they had sent letters to the  capital requesting reinforcements.  The former states of Yan,  Zhao, Qi, Chu,  Hann, and Wei  had all set up kings to head them, and in the area east of the Hangu Pass almost everyone   had
 
revolted against the Qin officials and gone over to the side of the leaders of the states, who were all leading their  troops  toward  the  west.  The governor of Pei, heading a force of 30,000 or 40,000 men, had  already  wiped out the defenders of the Wu Pass and sent a man to communicate in secret  with Zhao Gao.
Zhao Gao, fearful that the Second Emperor would be angered at  these events and that he himself would be subjected to  punishment,  pleaded illness and did not appear at court.
The Second Emperor dreamt  that  a white tiger  sank  its  teeth  in  the outside left horse in his team of four and killed it. Troubled in mind by  the dream and uncertain of its meaning, he questioned an expert in the interpretation  of  dreams.  The  diviner  replied,  “The  Jing  River  is  exercising a malevolent  influence.” The Second Emperor conducted a fast  at the Wangyi Palace, intending to  sacrifice  to  the  Jing  River  by  drowning  four white horses in  it.  At  the same time  he  sent  an  envoy  to  Zhao  Gao  to berate  him over  the  bandit uprisings.
Zhao Gao, terrified, began plotting in secret with his son-in-law Yan Yue, the magistrate of Xianyang, and his younger  brother  Zhao  Cheng,  saying, “The emperor refused to listen to admonition, and now that the situation is grave he wants to shift the blame to our family. I want to remove  the emperor and set up Prince Ziying in his place. Ziying is kindhearted and modest and the people will all listen to what he    says.”
Zhao Gao arranged for the chief of palace attendants to assist him from within the palace by spreading false reports that a large number of bandits had appeared and ordering Yan Yue to call out troops to expel them. Zhao Gao took Yan Yue’s mother into custody and held her in his own quarters as   a hostage.100 Then he dispatched Yan Yue with a  force  of over  1,000  men  to go to the gate of the Wangyi Palace. Yan Yue arrested and bound the commander of the guard and the archery  captain,  saying,  “When  the bandits broke in here, why didn’t you stop them!”
The commander of the  guard  replied,  “I  have  surrounded  the  buildings  with my men and taken every precaution. How could bandits possibly have entered  the  palace!”
Yan Yue proceeded to cut down the commander of the guard and lead his band of officials straight into the palace, shooting arrows as he went. The palace attendants and eunuchs were overcome with astonishment, some fleeing, others putting up a fight. Those who resisted were summarily killed, the dead numbering thirty or forty persons.
Yan Yue and the chief of palace attendants entered the hall together and shot arrows at the curtains surrounding the emperor’s throne. The Second Emperor angrily called for his attendants, but they were all too confused
 
and terrified to resist. Only one eunuch  remained by  the  emperor’s  side, not daring to desert him.
The emperor, escaping into an inner apartment, said, “Why didn’t you warn me earlier, before things came to this!”
The eunuch replied, “I didn’t dare speak out,  and  that’s  why  I’m  still  alive. Anyone who had dared to speak out  would have  been put  to death long ago — he wouldn’t be around  now!”
Yan Yue came forward and at once began berating the Second Emperor, saying, “You are arrogant and wilful and you punish and kill people without reason! The whole empire has turned against you.  You  had  better  settle things  for yourself!”
“May I see the chancellor?” said the Second Emperor. “Impossible!”  said  Yan Yue.
“I would like to be made king over just one province,” said the Second Emperor, but this request was denied. “I would like to become a marquis of 10,000 households,” he said, but this was denied.
“I would like to  become  one  of  the  black-headed  people  along  with  my wife  and children and to be  treated like  the  other  princes.”
Yan Yue said, “I have my orders from the  chancellor  to  punish  you  on behalf of the empire. Whatever you may propose, I would never dare grant it.” Then he summoned his soldiers to come forward. The Second Emperor committed suicide.
Yan Yue returned and reported to Zhao  Gao.  Zhao  Gao  then summoned all the major officials and princes of the ruling family and informed them of how he had punished the Second Emperor. “The state of Qin was formerly ruled by a king,” he said.  “The  First  Emperor  made  himself  sovereign  of the empire, and therefore called himself emperor. Now, however, the Six States have declared their independence once more and Qin’s territory is steadily diminishing. It would not do to go on using the empty title of emperor. We should use the title of king as before.”
Then he set up Ziying, the son of one of the Second Emperor’s older brothers, as king of Qin.101
The Second  Emperor  was  buried at  the  Yichun  Garden at  Du’nan  with the rites appropriate to one of the black-headed people. Then Ziying was ordered to fast and present himself at the ancestral temple to receive the jade  seal of office.
After fasting for five days, Ziying plotted with his two sons, saying, “The chancellor Zhao Gao killed the Second Emperor at the Wangyi Palace, but because he is afraid that the other officials will punish him, he pretends to    be acting righteously by setting me up as ruler. I have heard that Zhao Gao    is secretly in league  with the  men of Chu and intends to wipe  out the    Qin
 
ruling family and make himself king  of the  region within  the  passes.  Now he has instructed me to fast and appear in the ancestral temple, so he must intend to kill me in the temple. If I say I am ill and fail to go, the chancellor  will surely come here, and when he does so, we can kill him!”
Zhao Gao several times sent messengers to Ziying requesting him to proceed to the temple, but Ziying failed to go. As expected, Zhao Gao then came in person, saying, “The service of the ancestral temple  is  a  grave  affair. Why doesn’t Your Majesty proceed?”
Ziying stabbed and killed Zhao Gao in the palace where he  was  fasting,  and put to death Zhao Gao’s three sets of relatives to serve as a warning to the  people  of Xianyang.
Ziying had been king of Qin for forty-six days when the governor of Pei,  the military leader from Chu, defeated the Qin  armies,  entered  the  Wu  Pass, and advanced as far as Bashang. He sent men to bargain with Ziying  and persuade him to surrender. Ziying accordingly tied a rope around his neck, came in a plain carriage  drawn  by  white  horses,  handed  over  the seals and credentials of the Son of Heaven, and surrendered by the side of Zhi Rod.102
The governor of Pei then entered Xianyang, sealed up the palaces and storehouses, and returned to encamp at Bashang. A month or so later, the forces of the other states arrived, with Xiang Yu as their leader. He killed Ziying and the other princes of the Qin ruling family and their relatives, and then went on to massacre the inhabitants of Xianyang,  burn  the  palaces, take prisoner the men and women that staffed them, and confiscate their goods and treasures, which were divided up among the various    leaders.
After the Qin dynasty had been overthrown, the area was divided into three parts, with three rulers known respectively as the king of Yong, the king of Sai, and the king of Di; they were referred  to  as  the  Three  Qin. Xiang Yu made  himself  “Dictator  King of Western Chu”,  issuing commands to the empire and dividing  it  up  among  the  various  kings  and marquises. Thus the Qin was finally wiped out. Five years later, peace was restored to the empire by the Han.

The Grand Historian remarks: Qin’s ancestor Boyi won distinction in the time of emperors Yao and Shun and was presented with territory and a surname. Later, when the Xia and Yin dynasties were in power, the  family was dispersed and remained in obscurity, but when the power of the Zhou dynasty waned, the Qin rose to prominence, building its capital in the western borderland. From the time of  Duke  Mu on,  it  gradually  ate  away at the domains of the other feudal rulers until the process was finally completed by the  First Emperor.
 
The First Emperor believed that his merits exceeded those of the Five Emperors of antiquity, and that his lands were broader than those of the Three Dynasties, and was ashamed to be ranked with them. Master Jia has written an excellent discussion of the matter:103
Qin annexed the lands of the other feudal rulers and created over thirty provinces, putting in order the fords and passes,  relying  on  the  steep  places and barrier points, and stationing armed men to guard the  region.  And yet Chen She and his several hundred garrison soldiers, scattered and disordered as they were, lifted up their arms and  gave  a  loud  cry.  They used no bows or spears as their weapons, but mere  plough  handles  and bare sticks, eating their way from house to house and rampaging over the empire. The men of Qin were unable to guard their narrow defiles or block the passes and bridges, their long spears would not slash, their strong crossbows would not shoot. The armies of Chu entered deep into the heartland, battling at Hongmen and never once  encountering any  barriers  or fortifications to impede them. Thus the area east of the mountains was plunged into great confusion, the leaders of the states rose  up on all sides, and brave men and heroes one after the other came to the fore.
Qin ordered Zhang Han to lead his troops east  and  restore order. But  Zhang Han used the three armies under  his  command  to secure  land holdings abroad and plot against  his  own sovereign.  From this  one  can see how  untrustworthy the  Qin officials were.
When Ziying came to the throne, he failed to awaken to reality. If Ziying  had possessed even mediocre ability as a ruler, if he  had  been  able  to recruit even middling assistants, then despite the turmoil east of the mountains, Qin would have been able to retain control of its territory and  the sacrifices in its ancestral temples need never have been cut off.
The old territory of Qin is well protected by mountains and girdled by the Yellow River, a state fenced in on four sides. From the time of Duke Mu to  that of the First Emperor, Qin had over twenty rulers, and at all times they were leaders among the feudal lords. Surely this  was  not  because generation after generation they were worthy men, but because of the strategic position they occupied. Once before, the empire had joined together in heart and pooled its strength to attack Qin.104  At  that  time worthy and sagacious rulers abounded, skilled generals headed the armies, and wise ministers cooperated in laying plans. But they were frustrated by the steep slopes and narrow defiles and were unable to advance. To entice them inside and draw them into battle, Qin purposely opened the  passes,  and the invading troops, though a million strong, were  forced  to  flee  in defeat and were utterly crushed. Surely this was not because  they  were lacking  in  bravery  or   wisdom,  but   because   the   shape  of  the   land was
 
against  them and the  circumstances were not  to their  advantage.
Qin had little towns but it linked them together with big walls. It guarded its defiles and frontiers with armies, heightened its  fortifications  rather  then engaging in battle, closed its passes, relied on its barriers, shouldered its spears and stood guard. The leaders of the rebellion rose  up  from  among the common people and joined forces for their own profit — they did not act in the manner of natural-born kings. They were not linked by bonds of kinship, nor were their subjects as yet deeply attached to them. In name their goal was to overthrow Qin, but in reality they were out for profit. If they had observed that Qin’s barriers would be difficult to penetrate, they would surely have withdrawn their armies, remained in the safety of their own lands, rested their people, and waited for Qin’s power to decline.
One who succours the weak and aids the weary, as the ruler of a great kingdom is commanded to do, need never worry that he will not gain his way with the lands within the seas. But when one is honoured with the position of Son of Heaven, possesses all the riches of the empire, and yet ends up as a captive, it must be because he has failed to remedy his errors. The First Emperor trusted his own judgment, never consulting others, and hence his errors went uncorrected. The Second Emperor carried on in the  same manner, never reforming, compounding his misfortune through violence	and	cruelty.	Ziying	stood	alone	and	friendless,	weak	and imperilled, with no one to aid him.  All three rulers were deluded, and to   the
end failed to awaken — is it not fitting that they   perished?
At that time the world was not without men of deep insight and an understanding of change. The reason they did not dare exert their loyalty  and correct the errors of the ruler was that Qin’s customs forbade the mentioning of inauspicious matters. Before their  words  of  loyal  advice were even out of their mouths, they would have been condemned to execution. This insured that the men of the empire  would incline  their  ears to listen, stand in an attitude of solemn attention, but clamp their mouths shut and never speak out.  Therefore when the  three rulers strayed from  the Way, the loyal ministers did not dare remonstrate, and the men  of wisdom did not dare offer counsel. The  empire  was already in rebellion,  but the ruler was never informed of the villainy — how   pitiful!
The kings of former times knew the harm brought to the nation by suppression and concealment. Therefore they appointed high ministers and palace officials to put the laws in order and establish  penalties,  and  the empire was well governed. While they themselves were still powerful, they were able to outlaw violence and punish the unruly, and the  empire submitted to them. And later, when they became weak, the Five Hegemons carried  out  punitive  expeditions  and  forced  the  other  feudal  rulers   to
 
comply. Hence, though they were stripped of territory, they  could  guard their inner realm, the surrounding states supported them, and they were able to preserve their altars of the soil and   grains.105
In the case of Qin, however, while it was in a flourishing  state,  its  manifold laws and stem punishments caused the empire to tremble. But when its power declined, then the people eyed it with hatred and the whole area within the seas rose up in  revolt.
Hence, because the Zhou dynasty set up the five noble ranks and ruled according to the Way, it was able to endure for over 1,000 years without break. But the Qin was in error from first to last, and therefore it did not continue for long. From this we can see that the course of action leading to safety, and that leading to peril, are far apart indeed. The homely proverb says, “Former affairs, not forgot, teach those who come after.” That is why, when the gentleman is given charge  of  a  state,  he  observes  how  things were done in ancient times,  tests  them in terms  of  the  present  day,  sees how they tally with human concerns, examines into the cause of flourishing and decay, perceives what is fitting in the light of circumstances, initiates actions in the proper order,  and  changes  with  the  times.  As  a  result,  his days as ruler are long and many, and his altars of the soil and grain rest secure.106
Duke Xiao of Qin, relying  upon  the  strength  of  Mt.  Yao  and  the  Hangu Pass and basing  himself  in  the  area  of  Yongzhou,  with  his  ministers  held fast to his land and eyed the house of Zhou, for he cherished a desire to roll up the empire like a mat, to bind into one the whole  world, to bag all the  land within the four seas; he had it in his heart to swallow up everything in the eight directions. At this time he was aided by Lord Shang, who at home  set up laws for him, encouraged agriculture and weaving, and built up the instruments of war, and abroad contracted military alliances and attacked the other feudal lords. Thus the men of Qin were able with ease to acquire territory east of the upper  reaches of the Yellow   River.
After the death of Duke Xiao, kings Huiwen and Wu carried on the undertakings of their predecessor and, following the plans  he  had  laid,  seized Hanzhong in the south and Ba  and  Shu  in the  west, and  acquired rich land in the east and  provinces  of  strategic  value.  The  other  feudal lords in alarm came together in council to devise some plan to weaken Qin, sparing nothing in gifts of precious  objects  and  rich lands  to  induce  men from all over the empire to come and join with them in a “vertical alliance”, and pool their strength. At this time there was Lord Mengchang in Qi, Lord Pingyuan in Zhao, Lord Chunshen in Chu, and Lord Xinling  in  Wei.  These  four lords were all men of intelligence and loyalty, generous  and  kind  to others, who  honoured  worthy men and took  good care  of their    followers.
 
They rejected the Horizontal Alliance and instead formed the Vertical Alliance,  which united  all the  forces  of the  states  of Hann,  Wei,  Yan,  Chu, Qi, Zhao, Song, Wey, and Zhongshan. At this time  among  the  distinguished men of  the  Six  States  were  men  like  Ning  Yue,  Xu Shang,  Su  Qin,  and  Du He, who laid the plans; Qi Ming, Zhou Zui,  Chen  Zhen,  Zhao  Hua,  Lou  Huan, Di Jing, Su Li, Yue Yi,  and  their  followers  who  carried  out  these plans; and Wu Qi, Sun Bin, Dai Tuo, Er Liang,  Wang  Liao,  Tian Ji,  Lian Po,  and Zhao She, who commanded the troops. With a force of 1,000,000 soldiers drawn from an area ten times that of Qin, they beat upon the Pass and pressed forward toward Qin. But the men of Qin opened the Pass to entice the enemy in, and the armies of the  Nine  States  fled  and  did  not dare advance. Qin, without expending a single arrow or losing a single arrowhead, threatened the feudal rulers of the entire   empire.
With this the Vertical Alliance collapsed, its treaties came to naught, and  the various states hastened to present Qin with parts of their territory as bribes for peace. With its superior strength Qin  pressed  the  crumbling forces of its rivals, pursued those who had fled in defeat, and overwhelmed and slaughtered the army of  1,000,000  until  their  shields  floated upon  a river of blood. Following up the advantages of its  victory,  Qin  gained  mastery over the empire and divided up its mountains and rivers. The powerful states begged to submit to its sovereignty and the weaker  ones paid homage  at its court.
Then followed kings Xiaowen and Zhuangxiang, whose reigns were short and uneventful. After this came the First Emperor who, carrying on the glorious spirit of his six predecessors, cracked his long whip and drove the universe before him, swallowed up the eastern and western Zhou, and overthrew the feudal lords. He ascended the throne of honour and ruled the six directions, scourging the world with his lash, and his might shook the four seas. In the south he seized the land of the hundred tribes of Yue and made of it Guilin and Xiang provinces, and the lords of the hundred Yue bowed their heads, hung halters from their necks, and pleaded for their lives with the lowest officials of Qin. Then he sent Meng Tian north to build the Great Wall and defend the borders, driving back the Xiongnu over 700 li, so that the barbarians no longer ventured to come south to pasture their horses and their men dared not take up their bows to vent their hatred.
Thereupon he discarded the ways of the former kings and burned the books of the hundred schools of philosophy in order to  make  the  black- headed people ignorant. He destroyed the walls of the great cities, put to death the powerful leaders, and collected all the arms of the empire, which he had brought to his capital at Xianyang, where  the  spears  and arrowheads were melted down and cast to make twelve human statues. All
 
this he did in order to weaken the black-headed people. After this he ascended and fortified Mt. Hua, set up fords along the Yellow River, and strengthened the heights and  precipices  overlooking  the  fathomless  valleys, in order to secure his position. He garrisoned the strategic points with skilled generals and strong crossbowmen and stationed trusted ministers and well-trained soldiers to guard the land with arms and  question all who passed back and forth. When he had thus pacified the empire, the  First Emperor believed in his heart that, with the  strength of  his capital within the  passes and his  walls of metal extending 1,000  miles,  he had established a rule that would be enjoyed by his sons and grandsons for  10,000 generations.
For a while after the death of the First Emperor the memory of his might continued to awe the common people. Yet Chen She, born in a humble hut with tiny windows and a wattle door, a day labourer in the fields and a garrison conscript, whose abilities could not match even the average, who had neither the worth of Confucius and Mo Di nor the wealth of Tao Zhu or  Yi Dun, stepped from the ranks of the common soldiers, rose up from the paths of the fields, and led a band of some hundred poor, weary soldiers in revolt against Qin. They cut down trees to make their weapons and raised their flags on garden poles, and the whole world gathered like a cloud, answered like an echo to a sound, brought them provisions, and followed after them as shadows follow a form. In the end the leaders east of the mountains rose up together and destroyed the house of   Qin.
The empire of Qin at this time was by no  means small or feeble.  Its base  in Yongzhou, its stronghold within Mt. Yao and the Pass, were the same as before. The position of Chen She could not compare in  dignity  with  the  lords of Qi, Chu, Yan, Zhao, Wei, Song, Wey, and Zhongshan. The weapons which he improvised from hoe handles and tree branches could not match the sharpness of spears and battle pikes; his little band of garrison  conscripts was nothing beside the armies of the Nine States.  In  deep  plotting and far-reaching stratagems, in methods of warfare, he was  far inferior to the men of earlier times. And yet Chen She succeeded in his undertaking where they had failed, though in ability, size, power, and strength his forces could in no way compare to those  of the  states east of  the mountains that had formerly opposed Qin. Qin, beginning with an insignificant amount of territory, reached the power of a great kingdom and for 100 years made  the  ancient  eight  provinces  pay  homage  at  its  court. Yet, after it had become master of the six directions and  established  its palaces within the passes, a single commoner opposed it and its seven ancestral temples toppled, its ruler died by the hands of  men, and  it  became  the  laughing  stock  of the  world.  Why?  Because  it  failed to rule
 
with humanity and righteousness, and did not realize that the power to attack, and the power to retain what one has thereby won, are not the same.
The Qin ruler, having annexed the lands  of  all  the  other  feudal  lords, faced south and called himself an emperor, proprietor of all within the four seas, and the gentlemen of the  empire  docilely bowed before the  wind of  his influence.  Why was this?
I would reply that the world in recent times had for a long time been without a true king. The royal house of Zhou had sunk  into  insignificance,  the Five Hegemons had passed from the scene, and  there  was  no  one whose commands were obeyed throughout the empire. Hence the feudal rulers in governing relied on strength alone, the powerful impinging on the weak, the many lording it over the few. Weapons were never  set aside  and the people grew exhausted and impoverished.
Then Qin  faced  south  to  call  itself  ruler  of  the  empire,  which  meant  that the world now had a Son of Heaven to head it. The masses hoped that they would be granted  the  peace  and  security  to  live  out  their  lives,  and  there was  not  one  of  them  who  did  not  set  aside  selfish  thoughts  and  look  up  to the sovereign in reverence. This was the moment  for  demonstrating  authority  and  proving one’s  merit  as a ruler,   laying   the   foundation   for lasting  peace  in  the  empire.
But the First Emperor was greedy and short-sighted, confident in his own wisdom, never trusting his meritorious officials, never getting to know his people. He cast aside the kingly Way and relied on private procedures, outlawing books and writings, making the laws and penalties much harsher, putting deceit and force foremost and humanity and righteousness last, leading the whole world in violence and cruelty. In annexing the lands of others, one may place priority on deceit and force, but insuring peace and stability in the lands one has annexed calls for a respect for authority. Hence I say that seizing, and guarding what you have  seized,  do  not depend upon the same techniques.
Qin put an end to the Warring States period and made itself ruler of the empire, but it did not change its ways or reform its system of government, which shows that the means employed to seize an empire differ from those needed to guard it. Qin tried to guard it alone and singlehanded, and therefore its downfall was merely a matter of time.
If the First Emperor had reflected upon  the  practices  of  antiquity  and noted the accounts of the Yin and Zhou dynasties in formulating the institutions for his government, then although wilful  and  dissolute  rulers might appear in later times, there would have been no  danger  that  the  ruling house would be imperilled or overthrown. The founders of the Three
 
Dynasties, when they ruled the empire, were renowned for their good  names, and the regimes they initiated endured for a long time.
When the Second Emperor came to the throne, there was no one in the empire who did not look toward his government with anxious hopes. One who is cold will welcome even a skimpy coat of serge, one who is starving  will relish the  coarsest dregs.  The hungry hopes of the  empire  offer  aid to a new sovereign, for a weary people are easy to govern when treated with benevolence.
If the Second Emperor had acted in the manner  of even a mediocre ruler, if he had employed loyal and worthy men and had joined with his officials in single-mindedly caring for the nation’s ills, correcting the errors of  the former emperor while still in mourning garments; if he had divided the land and apportioned it to the people, enfeoffing the heirs of meritorious ministers, or had set up states with rulers over them so the empire would   be ordered by ritual; if he had emptied the prisons, pardoned those condemned to execution, abolished slavery and other forms of humiliating punishment, allowing each person to return to his native village; if he had opened the granaries and disbursed funds to succour  the  orphaned  and lonely and those in dire poverty; if he had  lightened  taxes  and  corvée labour to relieve the distress of the common people, simplified the laws and reduced penalties for the sake of posterity; if he had allowed the people  of the empire to make a new beginning, each tending to his own well-being through the practice of integrity and good conduct, fulfilling the longings of  the 10,000 people and presiding over the empire with authority and virtue, then the empire would have flocked to him. Then within the four seas all would have been perfectly content, each enjoying and finding security in his own station, fearful only that some  change  might  occur.
Then even if wily and unscrupulous persons should appear, so long  as there was no turning against the sovereign,  then  unprincipled officials  would have no way to gloss over their schemes and the threat of violence   and rebellious action would come to an end.
The Second Emperor, however, did not adopt such policies, but made the situation even graver by his departures from the Way, destroying ancestral temples and people and resuming work on the Epang Palace. He multiplied the laws and made punishments even sterner, his law officers  becoming  even harsher and more thorough in their investigations. His rewards and penalties were unjust, his  taxes  and  levies  knew  no  bounds.  The  empire was assigned so many tasks that the officials could not supervise them all;  the people sank into poverty and destitution and the ruler offered them no pity or help. Thereafter villainy and deceit rose on every side and superiors and inferiors turned against one another. Those accused of crimes were so
 
numerous that condemned men were within sight of each other on  the  roads, and the whole empire groaned. From lords  and  high  ministers  on down to the mass of commoners, all feared for their safety, all tasted in person the realities of hardship, none felt secure in his position. Therefore they were easily roused to action. As a result, though Chen She had none of the worth of a King Tang or King Wu, though he possessed no noble title of duke or marquis to rely on, he had only to raise his arm in defiance in Daze and the whole world responded to his call, because  the  people  felt threatened.
The former kings perceived the changes that occur in  the  course  of  events and understood the secret of survival or downfall. Therefore their way of shepherding the people was simply to assure them of security. Then although treasonous subjects might appear in the  empire,  there  would be  no one to respond to them or aid them.  So  it  is  said,  a  people  who  feel secure may be led into righteous ways, but a people who feel threatened easily turn to evil. To be honoured as  a  Son  of  Heaven,  to  possess  the riches of the empire, and yet be unable to  escape  execution comes  from failure to correct misdirection. Such was the Second Emperor’s error.107
